1. Introduction
The Guidelines which follow were initially developed for the
Internet Shakespeare Editions (ISE) from those prepared by David
Bevington for the Revels Plays. Additional guidelines on spelling and
usage are based on those prepared for the RSC Shakespeare Complete
Works edited by Eric Rasmussen; these are, in turn, indebted to those
that David Bevington prepared for the Norton Anthology of English
Renaissance Drama. Like the electronic editions themselves, these
Guidelines should be considered as a work in progress, capable of
refinement and adaptation as the editions are developed and new
questions arise. Much about the editions will be the same as those
prepared for print: the same high standards of scholarship, the same
activities involved in arriving at the modern text, and the same
kinds of supporting discussions on the text. But there will be a
number of ways in which the Internet Shakespeare Editions will differ
from print editions. 


1.1. Copyright
The primary aim of the Internet Shakespeare Editions is to create
scholarly texts and tools for the educational community. You will, if
you choose, retain copyright for materials you personally create for
the site; all, however, will be freely available for downloading and
use for educational and non-profit uses. The modern text will also be
reviewed for publication by Broadview Press in a "distilled" format,
focusing on a text usable in the classroom; your contract indicates
that the you will agree not to use your copyright materials for the
creation of additional versions that would compete with Broadview’s.
All texts posted on the site will be accompanied by the following
notice: Copyright [Editor's name], [date]. This material may freely
be used for educational, non-profit purposes, so long as due credit
is given. All other uses must be negotiated directly with the holder
of the copyright. While you retain copyright on the separate texts
you put on the site, the actual edition (its links, format, and any
interpretative software associated with the site as a whole) will
remain the property of the Internet Shakespeare Editions. It is your
responsibility to gain copyright permission for any materials
(written, graphic, sound, or video) included in your edition; you
should make sure that you have permission to post the material on the
Web, as well as permission to reproduce it in print if it is also to
be included in the Broadview version. Note: Editors are advised to
consult the policy of their institution concerning Intellectual
Property. 

1.1.1. Changes to the text on the site
Digital texts are capable of continuing refinement and
improvement; thus the text on the site will be a "maintained"
edition, never be in a fixed or final state. While the original
editor is willing and able to act as consultant, all changes proposed
in the text or its supporting materials will be approved by him or
her before being posted. In the event that the editor is not
available, the Coordinating Editor reserves the right to seek
alternative advice. 

1.1.2. Acknowledgment of collaboration
It is the policy of the Internet Shakespeare Editions to give
full credit to all those who have worked on any text, including
research assistants. 

1.2. Hypertext
Hypertext is the name given to the capacity that an electronic
text has to link one passage to another directly by a click of the
mouse. The effect of this kind of linking is often called
"non-linear" or "lateral"; it would, however, be more accurate—and
useful—to call it "multi-linear," since each individual passage is
itself linear. 

1.2.1. Multilinearity
The effect of hypertext's multilinearity is twofold when it comes
to the way you can develop an argument or organize data. 

> a) It is extensible
> Your basic document can be extended by detailed but separate
> discussions of points that might otherwise impede the linearity of
> your basic document. This function of hypertext is very like the
> traditional discursive footnote, except that it neither requires
> rooting around in the back of the book, nor cramping space at the
> bottom of a physical page. 

> b) It is a network
> Since the "footnote" becomes the center of the reader's attention
> once it has been displayed, it is itself capable of being
> interconnected to other materials, either its own further annotations
> or other materials of many kinds. ISE editions permit varying levels
> of footnotes, from a simple gloss to the equivalent of a complete
> appendix in an independent essay. See below, 5.3, for more detail.

1.2.2. "Good" hypertext
The effective use of the power of hypertext involves rethinking
the way you write. Here are some guidelines. 

	a) Keep it compact
	Since there is the opportunity to attach further discussion or
	documentation to any stage of your discussion, you should make every
	attempt to keep the primary document as tightly constructed and
	worded as possible. Remember that your readers will have to wait for
	the text to be loaded, and may be paying for the privilege in
	connection time. At all times avoid large files; the recent increase
	in "bandwidth" for many users should not lead editors to make the ISE
	texts difficult for students or scholars in developing countries to
	access. Think of your primary document (the textual introduction, the
	survey of criticism, etc.) as the backbone of your argument, with
	details fleshed out in separate mini-essays. Paradoxically, this
	means that the electronic medium both gives you the power to present
	a briefer, more cogent base discussion than the print medium, and, at
	the same time, allows you far more freedom to support that argument
	by detailed discussion. 

	b) Make a click worthwhile
	No-one wants to wait for a document to arrive if it is a simple
	line reference or a two-line comment. For this reason, you should
	include in-text references as much as possible, branching to other
	documents only when they will be worth the wait. Where you refer to
	an internal section of another document, make sure that you indicate
	the section as well as the document as a whole so that the browser
	will locate the specific passage. More detail on how to do this is
	provided in the separate sections below; see especially section 6.1.

	c) Use headings wherever possible
	Despite the development of light portable computers and tablet,
	the typical Internet reader will want to locate information quickly,
	speed-read it, then download or move on. Thus you should use headings
	wherever possible in order to direct your reader to the section of
	your work that is of interest. The table of contents will be
	generated automatically from your headings. The tradition in
	Humanities disciplines does not generally include the use of
	headings; think of them as brief topic sentences, and divide your
	discussion accordingly. 

	d) Create fluent links
	Try to avoid the rather clunky formulation "For more information,
	click here" and others like it. Integrate the link into the flow of
	your sentence. On a textual crux that requires a separate extended
	discussion, you might indicate the link thus: "This reading has been
	the subject of much debate." 

1.2.3. Web browsers and the format of the files
Editors will work with a simplified set of "tags" that identify
the characteristics of the text (see Appendix A below); most of these
are provided as a template with the tagging already in place. Working
from these base texts, software will automatically generate different
formats to satisfy different needs of scholars and the varying kinds
of browsers currently available. In technical terms, the base texts
will be converted to XML (eXtensible Markup Language). 

1.3. Introductory materials
In addition to the Textual Introduction, each text will normally
provide general introductions to major areas of critical and
historical debate: a survey of critical approaches to the play a
history of staging and performance a traditional critical
introduction, expressing your view of the play a textual introduction
In each case the essays should be considered as independent from the
actual text, though linked to it where appropriate. There is the
opportunity to add essays on other topics that you believe your
audience will find helpful in their reading of the play; in the
histories, for example, it will be possible to provide a document
summarizing the historical background of the time and the characters.
All these materials should be prepared according to the suggestions
above concerning the nature of hypertext; in the Broadview version,
these materials will be presented in a traditional, linear fashion,
though there will be headings throughout, following the Web
organization to facilitate movement between the two media. 1.4.
Additional resources for the Broadview edition

Broadview Press requires that each edition contain a chronology;
a bibliography; and annotated appendices amounting to between 50 and
100 book pages (or approximately 30,000-60,000 words) of background
materials (most commonly source materials, documents relating to the
historical and intellectual context of the play, documents relating
to the play’s staging, and documents relating to the critical
reception of the play). All these materials will be on the Web site;
in most cases you will want the Web version to be more complete so
that the student coming to your edition from the book will find
richer resources for research. 1.5. Additional resources for the Web

Since there are effectively no space limitations on the Internet
Shakespeare Editions, you will be able to provide far fuller
supporting materials than a printed edition, limited only by your
industry and the need to get copyright permissions. 1.5.1. Written

The editions will include the following: comprehensive sources
and analogs, annotated lightly documents that illuminate the
historical and intellectual context of the play performance
materials, both historical and (where you can get copyright
permission) current an anthology of criticism, principally historical
critical works of significance, now out of copyright. an extensive
bibliography a chronology of significant events related to the play.

1.5.2. Graphic
Whereas printed editions are limited by cost to relatively few
illustrations, you will be able to provide as many graphics as you
can get permission to use. This feature of the editions should be of
particular value in the sections that deal with performance history.
An increasing number of libraries and collections are willing to make
their images available on line; contact the Coordinating Editor for a
list of libraries where an agreement has been negotiated. 

1.5.3. Multimedia
In the age of YouTube, we anticipate that increasingly editors
will be able to add video annotations to their essays or footnotes.
Copyright problems here are a major difficulty in terms of well-known
films and productions; the ISE has had significant success, however,
in attracting the interest of the acting community in such a way that
productions and segments of productions will be archived on the site
and made available for research and teaching. See the Theater of the
site at http://internetshakespeare.uvic.ca/Theater. 

1.6. Collaboration
Collaborative editions are rare in Shakespeare studies. The scope
of the Internet Shakespeare Editions, and the nature of the
electronic medium, however, are such that collaboration is to be
encouraged. Editors may choose to concentrate on the basic text for
the edition, and to seek assistance in producing other materials.
Previous | Table of Contents | Next

2. Presentation of Material to the Coordinating Editor 

2.1. Reporting progress
You will work directly with the Coordinating Editor. You
should report on progress and problems at least quarterly. All
correspondence will be by email; all submissions should be on disk,
or (by prior arrangement) as an attachment to an email message. If
for any reason you find you must change the "timeline" you submitted
with your proposal, you should discuss the matter immediately with
the Coordinating Editor, and, where necessary, with Broadview Press.

2.2. Formats for submitting material
Edit In the changing world of continual revisions of software,
you should check with the Coordinating Editor which file format will
be compatible for the exchange of files. The safest is probably to
use Interchange Format (RTF); send the files as an attachment to
email, or on a CD. 

2.2.1. File names
All file names on the site will conform to a common convention to
facilitate automatic cross referencing. The file names must begin
with a letter or number, and must contain only letters, numbers, and
the underscore "_", the hyphen "-", and the ampersand. Files on the
site will follow these conventions: a) each file name will begin with
the standard abbreviation of the play you are editing (see below), to
a maximum of three letters; b) the underscore character (_); c) a
general identifier of the document (maximum two characters): M for
Modern Edition, F for Folio, Qn for Quarto[number], TI for Textual
Introduction, N for Notes, C for Collation CS for Critical Survey and
so on; Files independent of a specific play (sources, critical
materials and so on) will have normal names, preferably both
self-explanatory and reasonably short. 

2.2.2. Dating files
It is vital that all files be dated so that the latest version is
not accidentally overwritten. A particularly effective way of doing
this is to include the date in the file name; use the standard ISE
format for dates (yyyy-mm-dd), thus: “Jn_M_annotations 2008-02-14”
for the annotation file to King John updated on 14 February, 2008.

2.3. Backups and changes in the text
Edit Each file should include information about its most recent
revision, preferably in an HTML "comment" at the beginning of the
text. (See the detailed discussion of tags below: the comment tag
begins "<!--" and ends "-->"). You will also see that texts you are
given from the Coordinating Editor will have a series of entries
conforming to the Dublin Core agreement on meta-information as a
header. The particular section of this information you should keep
up-to-date is the date of most recent modification: <META
name="DC.Date.Modified" scheme="W3CDTF" content="2007-06-11"/> Always
keep copies of the work you submit, and back up all your files. Once
you have submitted work, you should not change anything in the files
until you have received a response requesting changes. Keep a list of
any changes you want to make, then enter them when you receive word
to go ahead, or a version of the file that has corrections to the
tagging entered. This procedure will prevent the confusing situation
where changes may be made in two places at once. (Note that the only
changes the Coordinating Editor might make to your files would be
connected with formatting and tagging to make them conform to the
Internet Shakespeare Editions; such changes would be made only after
consultation.) 

2.4. Work in progress and consultation
Edit At an early stage you should send samples of the work in
progress to the Coordinating Editor and the General Textual Editor
for comment. Take up major points of difficulty concerning tagging
with the Coordinating Editor, and discuss any departures you plan to
make from the standard method (e.g. lineation changes listed in a
separate file rather than the collation; any changes in the format
that seems to you appropriate for the work you are editing).
Questions relating to the text itself should be sent to the General
Textual Editor; matters concerning the old-spelling texts should be
sent to the Associate Textual Editor. Liaison over such matters will
avoid possible time-wasting alterations later; the Coordinating
Editor, the General Textual Editor, and the Associate Textual Editor
welcome involvement in the progress of the edition, and will be glad
to see and review various portions of the project as they proceed:
introductory material, a portion of the text with commentary, etc.

2.5. Refereeing
Edit All materials to be posted in the Library of the Internet
Shakespeare Editions will be refereed. The normal process will
involve two stages: 2.5.1. Stage 1

At an early stage, after consultation with the General Textual
Editor, you will be given an opportunity to have a substantial sample
of your work reviewed independently by a referee. 2.5.2. Stage 2

When your work is sufficiently complete, it will be reviewed in
full. See section 2.11 for a discussion of incremental publication.

2.6. Organization of the edition
Edit In the edition as you develop it, you should keep the
following sections as separate files: Folio text, quarto text(s) if
any, textual introduction, notes for the textual introduction, modern
text, collation, commentary, appendices (if any), glossary,
bibliography, survey of criticism, stage history, critical
introduction. See section 6.1.3. below on the various levels of
documentation available. 2.7. Line numbers

Edit 2.7.1. General
All references to Shakespeare's text in the editions will
ultimately depend on the Hinman Through Line Numbers (TLN). Where a
quarto or modern edition omits material the numbers will be omitted;
where they add material the numbers will be added using a decimal
(<TLN n="1033.1"> etc.); where the line division varies from the
Folio the TLN number will be that of the first word of the line. Each
line of tagged text will begin with the statement <TLN n="n">, where
n is the appropriate number. 

2.7.2. Modern edition
Line numbers in the modern edition will be calculated with one
line number for each line of verse, and one line number for each
prose paragraph (usually a whole speech). They should be indicated
immediately before the beginning of the line, and before the TLN
location if there is one at that point, thus: <L n="n">, where n is
the number. Stage directions should be given a decimal number
following the preceding line (thus the opening stage direction will
be numbered <L n="0.1"/>). See 4.4.8 below for more information. Line
numbers restart for the beginning of each scene. [For more on this
topic, see the discussion of this issue in the article by Michael
Best for EMLS at ​http://www.shu.ac.uk/emls/01-2/bestbook.html and on
the ISE site at​http://web.uvic.ca/shakespeare/Annex/Cafeteria/D1.html.] 

2.7.3. Folio, quartos
All lines in the Folio and quartos will begin with the TLN
location. Where the line differs from the TLN line breaks the first
word of the line will decide which TLN number to use. 2.7.4. Critical
materials

In order to facilitate cross-references, all paragraphs in
written materials other than the text and the notes to the text will
be numbered consecutively (numbers will be added automatically by the
Coordinating Editor). Verse quoted in these materials will also
include TLN numbers where the author is Shakespeare. 2.7.5. Source
materials

Depending on the nature of the source materials, they should be
numbered either by paragraph (prose), by line (continuous verse), or
by stanza/part and line (stanzaic or otherwise subdivided verse). In
the case of subdivided verse, the number of the main division (e.g.
stanza) comes first, and is separated by a period (no space) from the
line number within the subdivision. A section of the Faerie Queene
would be numbered by Book, Canto, stanza, line: follow the numbering
system of the edition you are referring to (1.3.79.8). 

2.8. Cross-references and links
All cross-references to the various texts, notes and
collation will be to the TLN number. Other files will have numbered
paragraphs for cross-referencing. It is important to provide enough
information to the programmers so that they can insert the
appropriate tags. See below, 6.1.8 and Appendix, 3.7. 

2.9. Final proofreading
You must check your play text verbatim et literatim before
sending it to the Coordinating Editor. He will check all tagging,
then send the file on to the General Textual Editor for review of the
content. Check all quotations and ensure that the typescript conforms
with the "style" of the Internet Shakespeare Editions as outlined in
this document. A methodical procedure is essential to ensure that all
quotations and references in the file are accurate. Check every
quotation and reference against the original before you send the
material to the Coordinating Editor. 

2.10. Returned materials
The Coordinating Editor will either return the file(s) to
you with comments and requests for correction or revision, or
communicate the comments by email if no changes have been made in the
files. 

2.11. Publication
When a final version has been agreed upon, it will be tagged
in its final form, and published on the site. With approval,
publication can be incremental, with some parts of the edition
appearing as they are completed. 

2.11.1. Incremental publication
The following parts of your edition may be published separately:

	a) the individual electronic texts of Folio and quartos (if any) 
	b) the modern text with collation and Textual Introduction 
	c) notes, commentary, and bibliography (not to be published before the modern
	text, of course) 
	d) survey of criticism 
	e) stage history 
	f) discussion of computer analyses of the play 
	g) anthology of criticism
	h) glossary 
	i) other resources.

3. Preparation of the Folio/Quarto Editions 

3.1. The purpose of the folio/quarto texts
Diplomatic transcriptions of the Folio and quarto texts will
be made available for critics, to provide a quick and accurate check
on the original spelling and punctuation in HTML format on the Web,
and for textual and analytical scholars to provide base texts in XML
that can be indexed and examined, or in turn be tagged more "deeply"
to provide additional information. In the transcription of the early
texts, you should keep all original errors, reporting them in your
Collation. 

3.2. Tagging the early texts
In order to simplify the complex business of working with
XML (powerful but verbose as a language), you will work with a
special set of tags that are in effect an extension of some basic
HTML tags, designed to be reasonably intuitive. Once inserted, these
tags can then be analyzed automatically, and can be used to create
both HTML and XML versions of the texts. The tags to be employed are
listed in the Appendix (section 1). You will be provided with "base"
texts with much of the tagging in place. 

3.3. Publication of the folio/quarto texts
The early texts can be published independently as they are
completed. You are expected to complete your work on them before
beginning work on the modern text, since the exercise of proofreading
and completing the transcription is likely to offer insight into some
of the textual problems the play presents. 

4. Preparation of the Modern Edition 

4.1. Formatting (the appearance of the text)

4.1.1. House style
The general style of the Internet Shakespeare Editions follows
the current MLA Handbook for Writers of Research Papers. Where the
MLA Handbook is silent, use the Chicago Manual of Style. The most
recent Handbook contains information on the correct citation of
Internet resources. Note that the ISE uses American rather than
British spelling. Use minimal formatting, as the editions on the
Internet are limited to the basic formatting codes understood by all
common browsers. 

4.1.2. The format of the modern text
Editors will be provided with a "template" for the modern text
once their old-spelling text is completed. The template will have
tagging in place, but will use the old-spelling text as a base. 

	a) Speech prefixes
	Put speech prefixes on a separate line; separate all speeches by
	a blank line before the speech prefix. Surround the speech prefix
	with the tags <SP></SP>. For details on the appearance of speech
	prefixes, see 4.4.7. below. 
	b) Speeches
	All speeches are printed on the line following the speech prefix,
	even those where the line is divided. They should be contained in the
	tag <S> </S>. The speech as a whole includes the speech prefix and
	any included stage directions. 
	c) Stage directions
	Stage directions will normally be on a separate line, with blank
	lines before and after; the exceptions are those that will appear in
	the same line as part of the speech, such as an aside, or an
	indication of who the character is speaking to. When stage directions
	occupy a separate line, their line number should be a decimal based
	on the immediately preceding line (or "<L n="0.1"/> for the first
	stage direction in a scene). In the HTML version they will be
	displayed in italic, including the names of characters; you should
	not, however, put them in italic in your word processor. They should
	be tagged with the <SD> </SD> container, with an "type" attribute
	indicating what kind of stage direction it is: <SD t="entrance | exit
	| setting | sound | delivery | whoto | action | location 
	|     other | optional | uncertain"> </SD>
	(see 4.4.6, especially [e]). When a stage direction involves two
	kinds of directions (an action and an entrance or exit, for example)
	list both types, separated by a comma: <SD t="entrance, action">Enter
	Lady Macbeth reading a letter</SD>. Where you are adding stage
	directions that are more for the benefit of the reader, and can be
	considered more directorial, indicate your choice with the type
	"optional," together with a further description of the direction:
	Example: <SD t="action, optional">weeps.</SD> Where the stage
	direction is for any reason uncertain (where exactly does a character
	enter or exit, for example), indicate—again with a further
	description—"uncertain": Example: <SD t="entrance, uncertain">Enter
	Hamlet.<SD> See below, 4.4.6.e, for more on uncertainty in stage
	directions. It is possible to combine more than one stage direction
	and type, where appropriate. Example: <SD t="entrance,
	uncertain">Enter Hamlet<SD> <SD t="optional">[reading].</SD> For
	details on the appearance of the names of characters, see 4.4.5.
	below. 
	d) Prose and verse
	Verse passages are indicated in the usual way by separate lines
	in your word processor. Prose passages will be a single "line" or
	paragraph. You may choose to divide long prose speeches with
	paragraph breaks, indicated by a carriage return, in which case you
	are using the paragraph as a further means of modernizing the
	punctuation, and should discuss the issue in your textual
	introduction. In addition, you will be asked to define sections of
	the text as verse or prose using the tags <MODE> </MODE> (see
	Appendix A, section 2.1). Partial lines in verse are indicated by an
	attribute of the line tag: <L n="[number]" part="i | m | f">
	(initial, medial, final). 
	e) Accented characters
	Use the ISE tag for all accented characters, including syllabic
	-èd endings (-{`e}d in ISE style). This is important, because the
	accents may be lost when the file is converted to XML. Here is a list
	of the most frequently used accents: {`e} letter with grave accent
	(è). {^o} letter with circumflex (ô). {"o} letter with dieresis (ö).
	{'e} letter with acute accent (é). {~n} letter with tilde accent (ñ).
	{_o} letter with macron. 
	f) Greek letters
	Since the Greek alphabet translates erratically from one computer
	and program to another, you should indicate in a separate email any
	passages that are in Greek, then proofread them carefully when they
	are posted online. 

4.2. The components of the modern text
The major constituent parts of a complete edition are listed
here; see section 2.11.1 above for a listing of those component parts
which can be seen as a minimum for independent publication. The more
extensive items are discussed in more detail in the next section.

4.2.1. The text
The following items may be published as a unit: preliminary
matter list of the characters in the play and notes on this list the
text textual introduction textual notes (i.e. collation notes).

4.2.2. A discussion of the date of the play
You may wish to publish this section of the edition at the same
time as the text, since your conclusions (if any) may involve some of
the same arguments you will be establishing in discussing other
textual problems. 

4.2.3. The commentary
Once the text has been published, the commentary can be published
separately. It will consist of the following: explanatory notes
(discussed further below) additional notes, appendix or appendices
(though in most cases material that would normally be contained in
appendices will be independent files, linked as needed to other
sections of the edition). 

4.2.4. Supporting resources
Each text may be linked to a number of resources for the scholar
and student. There is an opportunity for collaboration in the
development of these resources. As indicated in section 1.4,
Broadview Press requires that each edition contain a chronology; a
bibliography; and annotated appendices amounting to between 50 and
100 book pages (or approximately 30,000-60,000 words) of background
materials (most commonly source materials, documents relating to the
historical and intellectual context of the play, documents relating
to the play's staging, and documents relating to the critical
reception of the play). All these materials will be on the Web site;
in most cases you will want the Web version to be more complete so
that the student coming to your edition from the book will find
richer resources for research. The resources may include the
following: source materials (Shakespeare's sources; other original
materials that assist in an understanding of the text and its
context) an annotated bibliography a glossary an anthology of
criticism, which will include your own critical discussion of the
play graphics and multimedia performance materials. 

4.2.5. Supporting essays
Each text will be linked to essays written by the editor or a
collaborator: a survey of critical approaches to the play a history
of staging and performance a critical discussion of the play
(optional) a discussion of computer analyses of the play (optional).

4.3. Preliminary matter
Items like tables of contents and title page will be
generated by the manager of the site. Traditional preliminary
materials to be included may include the following:
dedication/acknowledgments (optional) preface (optional) list of
abbreviations list of illustrations. 

4.4. The modern text 

4.4.1. Determining the copy text

	a) General
	In recent years many basic assumptions about the nature of the
	transmission of the text from Shakespeare's pen to the printed page
	have come under scrutiny. There has been a rebirth of skepticism in a
	discipline that had for many years prided itself on its almost
	scientific objectivity. This has been on the whole a valuable
	exercise; you are encouraged to return to first principles in
	determining your copy (or control) text and in deducing what you can
	about its provenance. At the same time, remember that the overall
	objective of the Internet Shakespeare Editions is to provide tools:
	usable editions for others. The Internet Shakespeare Editions will
	accept high quality texts from editors with varying convictions about
	the ability of any modern editor to decide matters of textual
	transmission; the important point is that for these texts to be
	useful, the editor's position must be clearly spelled out and
	justified in the textual introduction. In general, the nature of the
	electronic medium will make possible a more "inclusive" edition than
	is possible in print, along the lines of the New Folger editions of
	Paul Werstine and Barbara Mowat. The eccentric and the merely
	pedantic are to be avoided; where there are no compelling arguments
	for changing a generally accepted reading it may be preferable for
	your modern edition to prefer the familiar and to discuss the issue
	(if necessary at some length) in the commentary or collation. See
	also the list of recent studies below. 

	b) The provenance of the text
	Where it is possible to do so, please make every attempt to
	achieve as clear an awareness as possible of the process of
	translation from manuscript copy to the surviving printed edition(s).
	Where you do not believe it possible to reach a defensible
	conclusion, make clear the issues that have been debated in earlier
	editions of the play. Matters which may affect treatment of the text
	include: the identification of compositors (and, where relevant,
	scribes) and study of their ascertainable habits of work; the
	sequence of setting of pages and the casting-off of copy; the
	sequence of imposition and printing of the forms; whatever evidence
	survives of proofing and correction, in the form of proof pages or
	press variants. 

	c) Reporting your findings
	State succinctly your findings in your discussion of the text, in
	such a manner as to indicate their likely significance and the nature
	and degree of their importance for the editing of the text. Where
	appropriate (e.g. when you are dealing with a subject of some
	controversy), you may wish to present a fuller and more detailed
	consideration in a separate file, to be linked both to the collation
	and the commentary. 

	d) Editions of plays with multiple source texts
	In the electronic medium, multiple modern texts of single plays
	will be possible. Taking Lear as an example, the site may eventually
	offer the following: A separate edition of the Quarto A separate
	edition of the Folio A conflated text of Quarto and Folio An
	inclusive text of Quarto and Folio. In addition, of course, the site
	will have electronic versions of both Quarto and Folio, and digitized
	images of both texts. The crucial point is that you should make clear
	what kind of edition it is that you are offering. 

	e) Emendations
	All emendations and conjectures should be consistent with the
	proposed history of the text as outlined in the introduction, and you
	should fully understand, and explain, how the reading of the copy
	text may have come into existence (e.g. misreading, mechanical error,
	scribal sophistication, authorial revision). 

	f) Some recent studies
	Specialized studies that may be helpful in cases involving
	complex or obscure transmission of the text can be found listed in T.
	H. Howard-Hill, Shakespearean Bibliography and Textual Criticism: A
	Bibliography (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1971; a new edition has been
	announced, but had not appeared at the time of this version of the
	Guidelines). Periodical articles published between 1933 and 1985 can
	be found in the Bibliographical Society's Index to Selected
	Bibliographical Journals, 1933-1970 (1982); and in John Feather, An
	Index of Selected Bibliographical Periodicals, 1971-1985, Oxford
	Bibliographical Society (1991). For more recent publications see the
	annual review of "Textual Studies" in Shakespeare Survey and the
	relevant section of the Shakespeare chapter in The Year's Work in
	English Studies. See also William Shakespeare: A Textual Companion.
	ed. Stanley Wells, Gary Taylor et al. (Oxford UP, 1987). Recent
	studies which discuss some of the challenges to long-accepted beliefs
	about the capacity of the editor to determine textual matters include
	William B. Long, "Stage-Directions: A Misinterpreted Factor in
	Determining Textual Provenance," Text 2 (1985): 121-37; Paul
	Werstine, "McKerrow?'s 'Suggestion' and Twentieth-Century Shakespeare
	Textual Criticism," Renaissance Drama 19 (1989): 149-73; "Narratives
	about Printed Shakespearean Texts: 'Foul Papers' and 'Bad Quartos,' "
	Shakespeare Quarterly 41 (1990): 65-86; "Shakespeare," in Scholarly
	Editing: A Guide to Research. D.C. Greetham ed. New York: MLA
	Publications, 1995 (a good overview); Barbara Mowat, "The Problem of
	Shakespeare's Text(s)," Shakespeare Jahrbuch 132 (1996): 26-43, and
	relevant chapters in A New History of Early English Drama, ed. John
	D. Cox and David Scott Kastan (New York: Columbia University Press,
	1997). You will also find articles discussing matters of editorial
	interest in the collection In Arden: Editing Shakespeare, ed. Ann
	Thompson and Gordon McMullen. London: Thomson Learning, 2003. On
	compositors, see Charlton Hinman's Printing and Proof-reading of the
	Shakespeare First Folio (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1963). 

4.4.2. Modernization of spelling and usage

a) General
The principal issues involved in modernization are surveyed by
Stanley Wells, in Stanley Wells and Gary Taylor, Modernizing
Shakespeare's Spelling (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1979), 3-36, and in
Re-Editing Shakespeare for the Modern Reader (Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1984), 5-31. His discussion should be of value to all editors
of modernized Renaissance drama, not least in drawing attention to
some of the words which will face editors with their most difficult
decisions and in indicating how uncertain is the line that divides
the categories of "genuine forms" (to be retained) and "variant
spellings" (to be reduced to standard modern form). Textual notes to
the Oxford Complete Works which discuss modernization of particular
forms are indexed in the Textual Companion, 666-7. Editors should
also read the concise rationale for the principles of modernizing
adopted in David Bevington's edition of theComplete Works
(HarperCollins, 1992); see the Preface. The style of this edition is
to spell words as they are spelled today (American spelling). Perhaps
the most convenient reference for modern US spelling is the
Merriam-Webster dictionary. It can be consulted online at
​http://www.m-w.com/. ISE editions avoid the kind of antique
spellings often found in the Riverside Shakespeare ("twelf," strook,"
"mushrump," etc.) As a general rule, check whether the OED lists a
given word as a separate entry with its own linguistic history (thus
distinguishing "corse" from "corpse," "clout" from "cloth," and
"beholding" from "beholden") or simply as a spelling variant of a
more standard form ("turbant" for "turban," "mushrump" for
"mushroom," "sound" for "swoon"). OED practice in this regard can
seem arbitrary at times — the distinguishing of "windore" from
"window," for example, or "estrich" from "ostrich" gives independent
entry to what is then identified as a variant form — but consider the
evidence. Generally, spelling variants should give way to the
modernized form, unless there appears to be compelling evidence of
dialectical use (which might pertain, for instance, to "handkercher"
and "neckercher" rather than "handkerchief" and "neckerchief," or
"lanthorn" instead of "lantern") or some such special effect such as
wordplay. Genuinely separate words like "sith," on the other hand,
should not be abandoned; in this case there is an equivalent meaning
in "since" but not an immediate linguistic connection. In context,
however, older forms like "holy day" (holiday) and "travail" (travel)
may commend themselves powerfully. We should be careful not to lose
resonances and wordplay when possible, while at the same time not
clinging to older forms simply because of their quaintness or
presumed color. Some early modern words, like "treacher," have no
close modern equivalent ("traitor" being the closest) and should be
retained. 

b) Preferred modernizations NEED TABLE
In the following list, the modernized form in the first column is
to be preferred before the older form in the second column unless a
plausible case can be made for the second form in context based on
matters of rhyme, meter, wordplay, etc: 'a (meaning "he")	a
account	accompt an (meaning "if")	and an't (meaning "if
it")	and't apiece	a piece artichoke	hartechocke
bonfires	bonefires burden	burthen chemical	chymical
coxcomb	cockscomb curtain	cortine curtsy	curtsey
diamond	diamante enough	enow 'em	hem errant	arrant gi'
(meaning "give")	gi god b'wi'you	god buy you ha' (meaning
"have")	ha ho (=surprise)	hoa, hoo I'll	I'le
lantern	lanthorn (unless dialectical) lain	lien more	mo
murder	murther mushroom	mushrump ne'er	ne're o'clock	a
clock o'purpose	a purpose ourselves	our selves
partridge	partrich powder	poulder salad	sallet show	shew
Signor	Signior shipwreck	shipwrack struck	strook, stroke
swoon	sound ta'en	tane than	then treacle	triackle
triumphed	triumpht turban	turbant usher	huisher
venture	venter vile	vild, vilde window	windore
wreck	wrack yon	yond Distinguish, according to modern
definition: "diverse" and "divers" "whether" and "whither" "aught"
and "ought" "ensure" and "insure" That is, print "whither" when the
sense of the passage is "Whither [where] shall I go?" even if the
Folio spelling is "whether"; print "diverse" if the sense calls for
"sundry," even if F1 reads "divers." Some modernizations inevitably
obscure a play of meaning: the interplay of "metal/mettle" in an
original spelling like "mettall" cannot be fully incorporated in any
single form, modern or ancient. In such a case, choose the modern
form that seems to represent the primary meaning, and gloss. So too
with the play of meaning in "trauell," often suggesting both "travel"
and "travail." Modernizing of spelling does not mean the abandonment
of strong forms that are no longer current in the language. Retain,
for example: again or again' (for "against") bare (for "bore," as in
"he bare himself in such a fashion") besides (for the modern
"beside," as in "How fell you besides your five wits?") brake (for
"broke") clawn (for "clawed") drunk (for "drank," as in "My wife
drunk to me last night") foughten (for "fought") gelt (for "gelded")
holp (for "helped") infortunate (for "unfortunate") is holden (for
"is held") prest (not "pressed"; "prest" means "ready") something
(for "somewhat") spake (for "spoke") unpossible (for "impossible")
Distinguish "Oh," (emotional outburst, cry of surprise or pain or
vexation) from "O" as a clear vocative addressed to the gods or in
apostrophe. "Oh" should normally be followed by a comma, "O" should
not. Most instances in Shakespeare are exclamations; opt for the
vocative "O" only when invocation and apostrophizing are clearly at
work. 

c) Preferred US English spellings NEED TABLE
In the following list of words with alternative spellings, the
spelling in the first column is to be preferred to the spelling in
the second: ax	axe ay	aye behooves	behoves
belabor	belabour caliber	calibre carcass	carcase
catalog	catalogue center	centre centering	centring
color	colour connection	connexion cozy	cosy
defense	defence dispatch	despatch draft	draught
inquire	enquire flavor	flavour focused	focussed
gypsy	gipsy gray	grey guerilla	guerrilla forever	for ever
fulfill	fulfil honor	honour humor	humour
inflection	inflexion installment	instalment jail	gaol
jailer	gaoler judgment	judgement license (noun)	licence
maneuver	manoeuvre marvelous	marvellous meager	meagre
meter	metre mold	mould movable	moveable
neighbor	neighbour offense (noun)	offence plow	plough
practise(noun)	practice practice(verb)	practise
pretense	pretence program	programme quarreling	quarrelling
savior	saviour savor	savour skeptical	sceptical
sepulcher	sepulchre skillful	skilful smolder	smoulder
somber	sombre sulfur	sulphur theater	theatre
toward	towards traveled	travelled wagon	waggon
woolen	woollen worshiped	worshipped The use of the suffix
"-ise" or "-ize" sometimes divides the US from the UK. The preference
of this edition is for "-ize": analyze, catechize, dramatize,
emphasize, organize, paralyze, realize, sympathize. However, a number
of words are spelled with the "-ise" throughout the English-speaking
world: advise, arise, comprise, devise, disguise, exercise,
otherwise, premise, revise, supervise, surprise, wise. 

d) Syllabic è
A word like "loved" is to be spelled "loved" when pronounced in
one syllable and "lovèd" when pronounced in two. Similarly,
"remedied" indicates pronunciation in three syllables, "remedièd" in
four. Words like "blessed" and "learned" present a special problem:
in adjectival situations they are pronounced in two syllables, but as
verbs are monosyllabic. It is best to spell them "blessèd" and
"learnèd" when they are used adjectivally. Note: wherever possible,
please use the ISE tag for indicating the accent, thus: {`e}. 

e) Contractions and elisions
Second person singular verbs: Modals are written without
apostrophe: "couldst," "didst," "hadst," "mayst," and "couldst," for
example. Verbs whose root ends with a pronounced "e" take no
apostrophe: "liest," "diest," "seest." Verbs whose root ends with
silent "e" drop the "e" and take the apostrophe: "desir'st,"
"liv'st," "presum'st," "com'st" (unless the syllable -est is required
by meter; see 4.4.2 o). Other verbs take an apostrophe and maintain
the root: "say'st," "know'st"; sometimes in modern practice these are
printed without apostrophe, but less familiar forms can look strange:
"hearst," 'stealst," "tearst," "feelst," 'tellst," etc. The most
satisfactory way to achieve consistency is to distinguish between
modals and all others. See also section 4.4.2 o) below on verbs that
end in "-est." Retain elision where appropriate for meter, in words
like "fall'n," "wat'ry," 'threat'ning." On spacing of elided words,
generally close up phrases when two words are to be pronounced as
one: 
and't 
at's ("at his") 
by'r 
by't 
done't 
does't 
do't 
d'you 
ere't
for't 
give't 
has't ("has it") 
ha't ("have it") 
have't 
he's (preferred to "h'is") 
if't 
i'faith 
in't 
is't 
i'the 
I've (preferred to "I'ave")
may't 
o'my 
on't 
or't 
o'that 
o'the 
o'your 
she's 
take't 
th'hast 
they're (preferred to "th'are") 
th'heels 
th'Italians 
th'others 
thou'rt (preferred to "th'art") 
tell't 
this's ("this is") 
thou'st 
t'have
t'inquire 
t'other 
unless't 
upon't 
were't 
will't 
with't 
you'd (preferred to "y'had") 
you're (preferred to "y'are") 
you've (preferred to "y'have") When elision involves more than two words,
close up all: "i'th'midst," "b'wi'you," "i'th'daytime," "i'th'soul."
Where the apostrophe in an elision is shared by the two words, the
form often can take a modernized equivalent, as in h'as he's sh'as
she's The modern form will work if it means "he has gone" or "she has
disappeared," but not if the meaning is "he has money" or "she has an
appointment." Use "I'd" and "he'd" as the shortened forms for "I
would" or "he would," rather than "I'ld" or "he'ld." Some
contractions and aphetic forms often require an apostrophe: 'bout
(abbreviating "about") 'fore ("before") 'gainst 'less ("unless") 'tis
'twas 'tween 'twill 'twixt Oaths generally require an apostrophe:
'Slid 'Slight 'Slife 'Sblood 'Save (meaning "god save") Some aphetic
forms that have become assimilated into the language, or that were
thus assimilated in the early modern period, do not require
apostrophe: faith ("i'faith") gree point ("appoint") prentice rest
("arrest") scape Modernize: for mercy sake	for mercy's sake for
god sake	for god's sake for credit sake	for credit's sake f)
Earlier practice

	The practice of earlier editors may prove a helpful guide but
should not be allowed to stand as an inhibiting precedent. Remember,
however, that the originality of the Internet Shakespeare Editions
will lie more in the kind and depth of critical apparatus than in the
text itself. g) Neither flesh nor fish

	Any compromise between full modernization and total retention of
copy text forms creates a text which represents no known stage in the
development of English orthography (unless it can be argued that the
text thus created is itself a "stage" in this sense). The attempt to
preserve the phonetic values of a few words (even if we could be
confident of knowing what they were) is anomalous in a text whose
standard of spelling is that of the late twentieth or early
twenty-first centuries. Spellings inviting discussion should be
collated, and may be discussed either in an additional note in the
collation or in the commentary. h) Nonstandard forms

	An obvious exception will occur when a character in a play is
given to the use of nonstandard or incorrect forms (indicating a
dialect, for example): these should, of course, be retained, in
whatever spelling best conveys their point. i) Languages other than
English

	Words or passages in foreign languages should be given in correct
standard modern form, unless, again, there is reason to believe the
inaccuracies are intentional and are designed to characterize the
speaker. In all such cases, the matter should be discussed in the
commentary. Words and passages in foreign languages should use the
standard tag <FOREIGN lang="[language]"> </FOREIGN>, and will appear
in italic in the HTML format. Digraphs representing diphthongs in
words or names of classical origin should be normalized as "ae,"
"oe," etc. NOTE: foreign alphabets translate erratically from
computer to computer. Please list all Greek or other passages in a
separate email to the Coordinating Editor, and proofread the Web
version carefully. j) Capitalization

	Emphasis capitals, freely used in the early editions, should be
reduced to lower case. If you find them of sufficient interest, you
may collate them, with or without comment in the commentary. Retain
or introduce emphasis capitals for titles only when individual and
identifiable title-bearers listed with the title in the list of
characters in the play are meant; e.g. King Henry in 1H4 will be
referred to as "the King," but Arthur in King John in will be "the
prince" because he is not titled "Prince Arthur"; "the Duke is
coming" (but "the king's peace"). In cases of real uncertainty, you
should consider whether the reference is specific or general and
capitalize or not accordingly. Where context indicates reference to a
particular holder of the office, capitalize "the Pope," and where
reference is to the corporate institution, "the Church." The ISE
style is to use lower case for references to god, and to use lower
case for pronouns referring to him or her, but upper case when God is
a proper name; e.g. "Dearly beloved friends, we are gathered together
here in the sight of God" (from the ISE text of The Marriage Service,
modernized by David Bevington). Lower case is also used for "lord" in
such phrases as "by the lord." Use upper case only when it is part of
a proper name. k) Characters' names

	Retain the traditional modernized forms of characters' names. In
general, it is better to avoid the approach of the New Oxford/Norton?
in its adoption of such spellings as Petruccio for Petruchio. l) O
and Oh

	The form "Oh" should be used only for emotional outbursts, cries
of surprise, pain or vexation, and should be followed by a comma. For
vocative and other exclamations use "O" without comma. Use "O" for
the vocative, "Oh" when an interjection. Particular instances may
occur where editors may wish to depart from these general
recommendations, e.g. where rhyme or dialect requires the other form.
m) Ambiguous forms

	Some forms in Shakespeare's text may be ambiguous in terms of
modern usage. For example, the forms "neer(e)" and "farr(e)" may
represent either the positive forms "near" and "far" or the
comparatives "nearer" and "farther." In such cases, use what seems to
you the most appropriate modern spelling ("near" and "far") and
discuss the matter in the commentary. n) Archaic forms

	Retain archaic forms only when (a) rhyme or meter makes them a
logical choice, or (b) a modernized form would not give the required
sense, or would obscure a play on words. o) Verbs that end in "-est"

	In the second person singular of verbs, follow consistently your
own preferred practice in the treatment of the "-est" termination. If
the copy text chooses "-est" or "-st" throughout, you may wish to
follow it, except where metrical considerations dictate otherwise.
When the "-st" termination is used, there should be no apostrophe
unless an "e" is part of the verb stem (hence "wouldst," "standst,"
but "dar'st," "com'st"). You should include a brief statement
explaining your practice in the textual introduction. This rule does
not apply to superlatives. In the case of superlatives, do not elide
the "-est" termination, whether the termination is syllabic or not.
p) Abbreviations

	Where the copy text abbreviates, or where meter requires
abbreviation, use the forms "I'd," "he'd," etc., for "I should," "he
would," etc., and not "I'ld," "he'ld," etc. Where your reading
differs from the copy text, collate it. Previous | Table of Contents
| Next

	4.4.3. Punctuation

	a) General

	Again, remember that the original punctuation is a click away.
Your modernized punctuation can generally be a good deal lighter than
the more formal punctuation employed by nineteenth-century editors;
lighter punctuation probably approximates more accurately
Shakespeare's habits, and leaves more open to the reader the varying
possibilities of interpretation in the text. As elsewhere, the MLA
Handbook is the basic guide. b) The punctuation of the copy text

	Do not preserve the punctuation of the copy text when it
conflicts with modern usage (e.g. "?" in place of modern "!";
brackets for vocatives; the colon merely indicating a pause). On
occasion, however, you may wish to retain your copy text's
punctuation for the sake of its dramatic or rhetorical significance.
Your response to the punctuation of the copy text will be conditioned
by your theory of that text's transmission. You should collate any
change in punctuation that may involve a change in meaning. c)
Specific usages

	Do not over-use exclamation marks or dashes. Use a dash--two
hyphens--to indicate change of character addressed within a speech.
You may sometimes have to indicate who is being spoken to with a
"whoto" stage direction. Since such changes of address usually come
at the end of a sentence, put a space after terminal punctuation and
before the dash to distinguish this specific usage of the dash from
an internal rhetorical dash or an open dash indicating an interrupted
speech. Do not leave extra spaces after punctuation marks, even after
full stops at end of sentences. d) Some recent studies

	For a useful and comprehensive standard of reference as to what
constitutes "modern practice," see, in addition to the MLA Handbook,
Randolph Quirk, S. Greenbaum, G. Leech and J. Svartvik, A Grammar of
Contemporary English(New York: Seminar Press, 1972), 1053-81. 4.4.4.
Scene division

	a) Accepted practice

	Follow the accepted division of the play into acts and scenes.
Where there has been some variation of practice, justify your choice
in the general textual discussion. b) Format

	The display format of act and scene divisions should be
consistant across documents, rather than reflective of any particular
printing. You should tag them as described in Appendix A. Example for
act 2, scene 1, first closing the previous scene and act:
</SCENE></ACT> <ACT n="2"><SCENE n="1"> <LD>[2.1]</LD> Where there is
an original act or scene division this fact should be recorded in the
collation. Previous | Table of Contents | Next

	4.4.5. Stage directions

	a) Scene location

	You should omit from the text editorial notes of location, but
you may, if you wish, collate or discuss the matter in the
commentary. See 5.2.10 below. b) Wording

	Retain the wording of original stage directions, unless
emendation or substitution is essential. Collate such emendations or
substitutions. Indicate additions to stage directions by square
brackets, and collate substantive additions, including names of
editors who introduced them. See 4.6.1 below. c) Punctuation

	Stage directions should be followed by a period when they make a
complete sentence. Thus Exit and Exeunt are followed by a period,
while Aside and To the King are not. d) Placing of stage directions

	When action or stage business is simultaneous with dialogue,
place stage directions in what seems the most convenient place and
explain any resultant difficulty in the commentary. You must decide
where to place entry or exit stage directions in relation to lines
referring to arrival or departure of the characters in question (e.g.
how long a time elapses between visible entry and arrival at
downstage positions). Since the possibility of overhearing often has
profound effects on the interpretation of a scene, you should discuss
the different possibilities in the commentary. When you find it
necessary to move a stage direction from its position in the copy
text, use no square brackets, but do collate the emendation. See E.
A. J. Honigmann's "Re-enter the Stage Direction: Shakespeare and some
contemporaries," Shakespeare Survey 29 (1976), 117-25. Where
possible, stage directions should be placed on a separate line. The
software will then italicize and center them (except for exits,
which, according to tradition, will be right aligned). Asides and
"whoto" stage directions may be placed within a line of dialogue. e)
Ambiguous or uncertain stage directions

	The electronic medium offers some alternative methods for
indicating uncertainty in entrances and exits; see the demonstrations
by Michael Best at
​http://web.uvic.ca/shakespeare/Annex/Articles/tapor/hamAnimated.html
. (Possible use of animation for recording textual variants is
demonstrated at
​http://web.uvic.ca/shakespeare/Annex/Articles/SAA2002/index.html>,
especially on the page
at​http://web.uvic.ca/shakespeare/Annex/Articles/SAA2002/rich4.html.)
You may choose to indicate uncertainty in a stage direction by a
query: <SD>Exit Petruchio [and Katherine?].</SD> Editors should feel
free to indicate where stage directions, especially entrances or
exits, are tentative. Note: there will be room for some discussion
with the Coordinating and General Textual Editors here. Either a
simple query may be used: <SD t="exit, uncertain">Exit (?).</SD> or
possibly an arrow up or down to indicate variability. See also the
discussion at 4.1.2.c. f) Foreign languages

	Collate stage directions translated from a foreign language. g)
Latin in stage directions

	With the exception of Exit and Exeunt, Latin words in stage
directions, such as Ambo, Manet, should be translated, enclosed in
brackets and collated. Manet may be rendered as "s/he remains/stays
behind," or else the stage directions may be rephrased as "Exeunt all
but," enclosed in brackets and collated. Omnes may be retained in the
formula Exeunt omnes, but should be translated elsewhere in stage
directions, and also when used as a speech heading, either as ALL, or
with indication of the group in question. Once again, all such
instances must be collated. h) Format and tagging

	All stage directions should be separated from the surrounding
text by blank lines, except when they occur within a speech. Use the
container <SD> </SD> for all stage directions; there is no need to
italicize them, since the tag will indicate where the font should
change. To make the analysis of stage directions more accurate, you
should indicate the "type" of the stage direction, according to this
list: <SD t="entrance | exit | setting | sound | delivery | whoto |
action | location| other | optional | uncertain"> </SD> Where a stage
direction contains more than one instruction, the different types
should be separated by commas. Where there is a clear sequence of
events, the separate actions should be indicated individually on
separate lines. Examples: <SD t="sound, setting">Hautboys.
Torches.</SD>

	<SD t="entrance, setting">Enter a Sewer, and divers Servants with
dishes and service over the Stage.</SD>

	<SD t="entrance">Enter Macbeth</SD> Of course there will be
single instructions that include more than one direction; in such
cases indicate the types, separated by commas: <SD t="entrance,
setting"> Enter Lady Macbeth alone with a Letter.</SD> i)
Capitalization

	All stage directions should begin with an initial capital
(whether the stage directions occur within a speech or separately).
In entries and exits write proper names in normal font (e.g. Bianca,
not BIANCA); write common nouns referring to minor characters (e.g.
"Servant," "Lord") or used as prefixes (e.g. "Lady Montague") in the
same way: lower case with an initial capital. The same is true of
common nouns referring to major (i.e. individualized) characters in
capitals (e.g. "Duke" in Measure for Measure). However, minor
characters who do not speak, but are mentioned in stage directions,
should not be capitalized; that is, an "attendant" with no lines,
whose presence is included (in the copy text or by the editor)
because he has to exit to fetch another character, would not be
capitalized, ("Exit an attendant."). Note that in the very common
case when a nameless servant does have a line or two, the stage
direction will read (for example) "Enter Servant." These instructions
also refer to the list of characters. j) Editorial changes and
additions

	Editorial stage directions and editorial additions to stage
directions of the basic text(s) should be enclosed in square
brackets. Do not use square brackets for expansion of abbreviations.
Comment on additions and alterations of substance to the stage
directions of the basic text(s) in the commentary. Original
punctuation of stage directions to which additions are made should
remain outside the square brackets, editorial punctuation goes within
them. k) Asides

	Asides should be indicated by <SD t="whoto">[Aside]</SD>
immediately before the relevant words if there is no doubt that they
are an aside; the following words of the speech, if not spoken aside,
should be preceded by <SD>[To them]</SD> or whatever is appropriate.
Be cautious in designating speeches as asides, since to do so will
materially alter the interpretation of surrounding speeches; where
relevant, discuss the issue in the commentary. If there is a stage
tradition where a speech has sometimes been spoken as an aside,
sometimes not, you can indicate uncertainty: <SD t="whoto,
uncertain">[Aside (?)]</SD>. l) Disguise

	You should normally draw attention to the adoption of disguise by
adding in square brackets the assumed name of a disguised character
after the regular name in entry stage directions, separated by "as."
<SD t="entrance">Enter Kent disguised [as Caius]</SD> Collate assumed
names of disguised characters in entry stage directions in accordance
with the normal procedures for stage direction variants. Do not
introduce into the stage directions a disguise name unused, or rarely
used, in dialogue. Use the commentary for fuller discussion of any
point of difficulty, or where disguise identities change within a
scene. m) Line numbers of stage directions

	On numbering stage directions in the commentary, collations, and
introduction, see 2.7.2 above, and Appendix A. 4.4.6. Speech prefixes

	For a recent discussion of some of the issues involved in speech
prefixes, see Susan Snyder, "Naming Names in All's Well That Ends
Well" SQ 43 (1992): 265-79. a) Normalization

	Normalize speech prefixes throughout a play. Use the full form of
a character-name throughout. Collate significant variations in the
copy text, and note the matter in the commentary; you may also wish
to discuss the issue in the Textual Introduction. Do not use square
brackets [ ] in the text for altered or supplied speech prefixes. b)
Format

	Speech prefixes will use upper and lower case as in normal prose:
Macbeth, not MACBETH. Give speech prefixes in the shortest
unambiguous form of the name or description of the speaker: e.g.
Canterbury or Archbishop rather than Archbishop of Canterbury. Where
rank or title changes during the action, you may change speech
prefixes to reflect the fact, unless confusion is likely to result.
NOTE: The current display of speech prefixes on the site shows them
in capital letters with a reduced font size. This is for stylistic
reasons: the computer converts lower to upper case. The reason we
have chosen standard lower case for prefixes is that it's possible to
convert them automatically to upper case, but not the other way
around, since the computer program will not be smart enough to know
what to do with MacDuff, for example. c) Groups of characters

	Speech prefixes for groups of characters should use numerals: 1,
2, 3, etc., rather than first, second, third. e.g. 1 Soldier, 2
Servant. d) Epithets

	Where characters of the same name are distinguished by epithets,
usually "old" and "young," treat these epithets as part of the name
thus: Old Siward. e) Assignment of speeches

	Where major innovation or editorial decision is involved in
assignment of speeches, you should discuss the matter in the
commentary. f) Typographical appearance

	All speech prefixes must follow these conventions: each should
appear on a separate line, with a blank line preceding it and the
speech beginning on the next line the prefix should be surrounded by
the <SP></SP> tags names should be in upper and lower case letters,
as appropriate. Previous | Table of Contents | Next

	4.4.7. Lineation

	a) Numbering

	Insert both TLN number and the edition line number at the
beginning of each line (see 2.7. above for format, and for the
numbering of lines that do not exactly coincide with the Folio). b)
Definition of lines of verse

	Complete verse lines are counted as one unit, even when divided
between two or more speakers. Partial lines in verse are indicated by
an attribute of the line tag: <L n="[number]" part="i | m | f">
(initial, medial, final). Alternatively, you may indent the second
(and subsequent) speaker's portion of the line with one or two tab
characters to provide a visual reminder that a single line is being
shared, according to this scheme: one tab = a medial part of a line
when it is broken into three parts two tabs = the final part of a
line (even if it is divided into only two parts). (In the final XML
version these line parts will be distinguished by the tags indicated
above.) NOTE: recent discussions by the Editorial Board and Editors
has suggested that editors may choose not to indent partial lines,
following recent practice in such editions as the Rasmussen and Bate
edition of the Folio. Even if editors choose to follow this
convention, however, the information should still be imbedded in the
text. In general it is best to keep doubtful verse lines without
indentation. c) Verse and prose

	Consider carefully whether or not lines conventionally
represented as divided verse lines are best so represented; note that
on the Internet the display of indented lines may not be as elegant
as on the printed page, so that when there is some doubt as to
whether the line is fully metric you may wish to put the speeches on
separate, short lines. Valuable discussions of this issue will be
found in the "Textual Analysis" in Antony and Cleopatra, ed. David
Bevington (Cambridge UP, 1990), 266-70, on the handling of three
consecutive half-lines which admit of more than one possible
lineation (in which case, you may be well advised to indent none of
the three), and more generally in G. T. Wright, Shakespeare's
Metrical Art (Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1988). The Oxford Textual
Companion, 640-65, gives a detailed list of problems of lineation in
all the plays; see also its general discussion of the issue, 637-40.
d) Stage directions

	Stage directions should be assigned a decimal line number, with
the exception of a direction that occurs between two half-lines of
verse, or a direction that is inserted by the editor within a line of
verse (often an explanatory action or an indication of who a speaker
is addressing). In these cases, cross-references to the stage
direction will be the same as for the line of verse it interrupts. If
a stage direction occurs in the middle of a passage of prose, create
a new line for the stage direction, and a further new line when the
passage continues. For more on cross-referencing, see Appendix A,
section 3. e) Mislineation

	Emend demonstrable mislineation in the copy text, and collate the
emendation. Take account of the kind of verse Shakespeare was writing
at the time of the play in making your decisions. See Paul Werstine,
"Line Division in Shakespeare's Verse: An Editorial Problem,"
Analytical and Enumerative Bibliography 8 (1984): 73-125. Variants in
lineation can be recorded as described in 4.6.1. f) Prose

	Prose passages in the modern edition are typed continuously, and
occupy one line. Although it has not been a common practice, you may
choose to break up a longer prose speech into more than one line,
introducing what is in effect a paragraph break; all such decisions
should be commented on. g) Quotations: songs, poems, letters etc.

	Songs, poems, letters, and other quoted passages, whether sung,
read or recited, are tagged <QUOTE> </QUOTE>. Use <MODE>to
differentiate between verse and prose passages. h) Foreign languages

	All words and passages in foreign languages should be tagged
<FOREIGN lang="[language]"> </FOREIGN> They will appear in italic in
the HTML version. i) Major variations in lineation

	In texts where different editions divide lines differently (Lear,
for example), or where the original text requires substantial
editorial intervention to reconstruct the verse (Pericles), you will
be able to record the differences, and permit users dynamically to
see the differences between the two versions. This issue is discussed
on the page that deals with advanced methods of recording major
variants and ambiguities. 4.4.8. Insertions in the text

	Use square brackets only for insertions in marking of scene
divisions and in stage directions. Do not place any insertion of a
letter or word in the text itself in square brackets. Collate all
such insertions. Previous | Table of Contents | Next

	4.4.9. List of the characters in the play

	Place a list of characters' names before the start of the text.
Where such a list exists in the basic text(s), retain this form,
supplementing it as necessary. For other plays (the majority),
arrange the list for ease of reference; do not follow editorial
convention if good reasons exist for departure from it. You should
not observe social or political hierarchies if other systems, e.g.
order of appearance or relationship (family, national or factional),
make for greater clarity. The practice of segregating female roles at
the foot of the list should be abandoned (except in the case of your
retaining a list from the original text), though notes on casting and
doubling of roles should make it clear which roles would, or might,
have been played by boys. You may choose to group characters to make
their relationships clearer (putting all characters from England in
one group, all from France in another in a history play, for
example); when you do so, it will be helpful to indicate what the
groups represent. The list of characters in the play will be titled
"Characters in the Play." Notes on the list of characters in the play
should include discussion of variant forms of speech headings or
changes in designation of characters in the course of the action,
including disguises. Other matters that may best be considered here
include pronunciation of names and information about historical
characters. Notes should take the form of annotations, using the
template provided, and giving all entries the TLN of "0". Previous |
Table of Contents | Next


	4.4.10 Props

	In the modern text, editors are encouraged to include tagging
that highlights props in a play, as an aid to understanding and
analyzing staging. The tagging can take two forms: where an item is
mentioned in the text, and where one is implied. <TLN n="613"/>Is
this a <PROP>dagger</PROP> which I see before me, This example,
however, is a reminder of alternative possibilities of staging, where
the dagger may well be visible to Macbeth only. For this reason, you
may include a description of the prop that, in this case, indicates
its uncertain nature: <TLN n="613"/>Is this a <PROP desc="a dagger,
possibly a hallucination">dagger</PROP> which I see before me,
Sometimes a prop is indicated by inference rather than being
mentioned directly. The common stage direction "Draws" is a good
example. This would be tagged thus: <SD t="action">Draws.</SD><PROP
item="sword"/> Optionally, of course, there could also be a
description: <SD t="action">Draws.</SD><PROP item="sword"
desc="probably a rapier"/> Note that where there is no word enclosed
by two tags, the single tag ends with the character "/" making it
self-closing. Previous | Table of Contents | Next

	4.5.1. The copy text

	You must indicate prominently the copy text you have chosen and
your reasons for doing so. You should discuss the attempts of earlier
editors to construct a presumed history of the copy text from
Shakespeare's autograph to the latest substantive edition, adding
your own conclusions where you deem this possible. You should also
discuss what is known of printing-shop work on the text. State
clearly the editorial principles of the present edition, based on
these findings, and give a list of the editions you have consulted.
See Margareta de Grazia, "The Essential Shakespeare and the Material
Book" Textual Practices 2 (Spring 1988): 69-86. 4.5.2. Date

	Discuss the probable date of composition of the play, and any
questions about the text that may be influenced by your conclusions.
4.5.3. Sources

	Undertake some discussion of the play's sources, where these are
known or have been discovered. Emphasize the influence an
understanding of the sources may have on your editorial choices in
determining the text. 4.5.4. The theater

	Where the theater of first performance is known, it may be
valuable to discuss briefly the audience and/or stage conditions at
that theater; alternatively you may wish to discuss this issue in the
Performance History, cross-referencing where appropriate. Previous |
Table of Contents | Next

	4.6. Collation Last modified by Maxwell Terpstra on 2015/04/03
12:24 Comments (0) · Annotations (0) · Attachments (0) · History ·
Information Edit The collation will be contained in a separate file.
You will be provided with a template in XML format (see below,
4.6.8-9, for examples). The format will allow you to create
collations that are less runic and more accessible as an independent
document than the cramped notations made necessary by the printed
page. The format of the Textual Companion to the new Oxford Complete
Works can serve as a partial guide. Where necessary you will be able
to add a brief note on an individual reading; longer discussions
should be included in the commentary. Because the Collation will be a
separate, self-contained document, each lemma will be identified both
by TLN and by act, scene, and line, keyed to the modern edition. From
the one collation file, readers will be able to generate a number of
different views of textual variants. 4.6.1. Departures from the copy
text

	The collation should record all editorial departures from the
copy text, as far as substantive readings are concerned. This applies
to stage directions, as well as text (see "stage Directions" above,
4.4.6.). Minor stylistic corrections to the stage directions in
square brackets, such as "Draw[s] his sword," "Enter [the] Doctor,"
etc., need not be collated; the editorially added matter will be
clearly marked by the brackets. 4.6.2. Where there are two early
texts of independent authority

	The collation must record all cases in which the text not chosen
as copy text departs, in substantive matters, from the copy text.
4.6.3. Changes in punctuation.

	Collate changes in punctuation only when they bear on a textual
argument; when modernization entails a choice between two senses
possible in the original; or when punctuation is altered to correct
the sense of the copy text. 4.6.4. Changes in spelling

	Collate changes in spelling only when modernization entails a
choice between two meanings possible in the original, or when the
spelling bears on a textual choice or argument. In some instances, it
may be possible to animate such variants. 4.6.5. Collation of
subsequent editions

	Collate subsequent editions of importance, particularly
twentieth-century editions, whenever, but only when, a reading is
offered which you deem worthy of serious consideration along with the
one you yourself have chosen. This is of course mandatory when a
previous editor's reading or conjecture is discussed in the
commentary. In addition to those early editors whose readings you
accept, the list of editions all of whose emendations you should
include (but not necessarily discuss) begins with the Globe or the
Cambridge (1863-66), which were long hugely influential and form the
basis of most on-line texts today, and continues with Dover Wilson's
New Cambridge, Kittredge, Alexander, the New Arden, New Penguin,
Pelican, Riverside, the still New(er) Cambridge (of the 80s and 90s),
the Oxford Complete Works (1986), the single-volume Oxfords, David
Bevington's HarperCollins, the New Folger, the Third Arden, the
revised Riverside, and the New(er) Penguins which Stephen Orgel and
A.R. Braunmuller are supervising as general editors. 4.6.6.
Historical collation

	It is not necessary to give the full textual history of a
reading; only the earliest source of a reading should be cited (e.g.
where a text went into several quartos, and the later quartos are not
of independent authority, you do not need to record these later
readings, nor the readings of subsequent editors when these readings
are mistaken or misconceived). 4.6.7. When in doubt

	When in doubt whether to include a collation, include it with a
query to the General Textual Editor. 4.6.8. Format of collations

	The template you will receive provides a framework for the
collations. You can copy and paste it into your working document as
often as you need. <coll> <ln tln="nnn">xxxx</ln> <lem
resp="F1"></lem> <rdg resp="yyy"></rdg> <rdg resp="zzz"></rdg>
<general_note></general_note> </coll> a) Each collation is surrounded
by the tags <coll> . . . </coll>. b) The TLN can be a single number,
a number with a decimal addition, or a range of numbers. The decimal
addition is needed for lines where the Folio has no equivalent (in
plays where a quarto is the copy text, for example). Express a range
of numbers using the full number in each case: <ln tln="1003-1009"/>,
for example. NOTE: where you wish to collate a number of repeated
instances on different lines, mention the other instances inside the
<general_note></general_note>, or create separate, individual
collations for each. Do not include them in the TLN tag. c) The line
number (xxxx in the template) is the line of the current scene in
standard MLA format (1.3.143). Again, for a range of numbers use the
full number at the start and end of the range. d) A lemma can be a
single word, a phrase, or a longer section indicated by ellipsis
(three periods separated by spaces). The lemma is not only the word
or phrase for which there are variants, but also the "anchor" which
the reader will click on to see the full collation. For this reason,
it is important that you design the lemma with three points in mind:
A single-word lemma must be long enough to permit clear visibility of
the underline that indicates a variant, and to permit easy clicking.
Thus, for example, a single "I" or "a" should be avoided; add a
second word to the lemma and to each reading that you list. Since the
computer will find the first example of the lemma in a given TLN
range, the lemma must be unambiguous. If a word is repeated in a
line, and you are referring to the second instance, you should again
include an additional word before or after. When you indicate a
longer passage using ellipsis, the collation will be linked from the
first part of the passage, before the ellipsis. Thus this initial
section of the lemma must be of sufficient length and be unambiguous.
NOTE: it is very important that the lemma is exactly the same as it
is recorded in your edition including final punctuation. Otherwise
the computer will not be able to match it, and there will be an
error. The safest way to ensure accuracy is to copy and paste from
your edition, making sure to update any collations should you later
revise your modern text. If the lemma includes a TLN tag (as may
happen especially in prose passages), delete the tag but make a note
for the Coordinating Editor, in a separate file. e) Both for the
lemma and for each reading, the attribute "resp=" refers to the
edition or editor responsible for the reading. In the template above,
the default is "F1" (ISE style requires a number after each folio,
quarto, or octavo mentioned); where the copy text is a quarto the
template will provide a default of Q1. You will, of course, change
this as necessary. f) The template provides three spaces for
readings. You should delete lines where these are not needed, and add
further lines by copying and pasting if you are recording more than
three readings. g) Where a given reading is shared by more than one
edition, either cite only the first instance, or create a second
<rdg> tag for it. h) List readings in chronological order. 4.6.8.1
Advanced display of complex variants

	See this page for the tagging required to display complex
variants and ambiguities in the text: relineation between different
versions, added passages, variants significant enough that the reader
should be alerted to them even when collations are not being
displayed, and animation when a single word is irreducibly ambiguous.
4.6.9. Adding notes to collations

	Sometimes you will want to add a brief note to a lemma or
reading: such common information as "and so throughout." In each
case, enclose the note in the tags <note> </note>, as in the example
in the next section. You can add a note to a specific reading by
including it within the <lem></lem> or <rdg></rdg> tags thus: <lem
resp="Cambridge">This would . . . and all.<note>Shared
line.</note></lem> If you want the note to refer to the collation as
a whole, using the provided <general_note> section. Some frequently
used notes should be indicated by adding the appropriate attribute to
the <rdg> tag. "Substantively," "Conjectured," and "Not in [text]"
can be consistently rendered when the tagging reads thus: <lem
resp="Pope" subst="true">Haply</lem> <rdg resp="Blayney MS"
conj="true">you—</rdg> <rdg resp="Q1" omit="true"></rdg> 4.6.10.
Collating press variants

	Collations can record press variants in specific copies
(witnesses) of an edition. The collations can record the variant
readings of witnesses, and can indicate whether they represent the
initial state or the proofread state. While it is true that it is
often difficult to be sure of the direction in which a change was
made, the editor will need to make a judgment as to which reading
represents the first or second (or even third) state of the text.
Each collation will include, as a header, a list of witnesses which
record the short form, the long form, and the location of the copy:
<listWit> <witness id="Q1a" longid="Huth">British Library, Huth
46</witness> <witness id="Q1b" longid="Devonshire">Devonshire [full
description]</witness> <witness id="Q1c" longid="Petworth">Petworth
[full description]</witness> <witness id="Q1d" longid="Capell">Capell
[full description]</witness> </listWit> In recording individual
variants, you can identify specific witnesses using the short form,
and in addition indicate whether the reading records the first or
subsequent state. Here is an example of a collation of multiple
witnesses in two states: <coll> <ln tln="259">1.2.42</ln> <lem
resp="Q1b Q1c" state="2">alas, may I</lem> <rdg resp="Q1a Q1d"
state="1">may I</rdg> <rdg resp="F1">(alas may I)</rdg> </coll> Note
1: where more than one witness is recorded, the witnesses are
separated by a space. Note 2: where a reading is shared by all extant
copies of an edition the generic short form is used (Q1 etc). For
display, the short form will appear when collations are shown
colour-coded, the long form in the window that appears when a
collation is clicked on. 4.6.11. Sample collations

	Please ensure that your collation file includes an initial HTML
comment that records the name of the author, the text being collated,
the date of creation, and the most recent revision. Example:
<!--Collations to As You Like It by David Bevington. Created
2006-12-05, most recently modified 2007-07-07.--> It is a good idea
to include the date of most recent revision in the file name so that
you can be sure not to work on an older file. Example:
Jn_M_annotations 2007-08-11.txt A basic collation: <coll> <ln
tln="110">34</ln> <lem resp="F3">she</lem> <rdg resp="F1">hee</rdg>
</coll> A collation where the reading originates in the copy text,
but where the copy text's spelling has been modernized: <coll> <ln
tln="57">1.1.17</ln> <lem resp="F1">villain</lem> <rdg
resp="F1">villaine</rdg> <rdg resp="Oxford 1986">villein</rdg>
</coll> A collation with inserted notes: <coll> <ln
tln="226">1.2.16</ln> <lem resp="Malone"
subst="true">Touchstone</lem> <rdg resp="F1">Clow. <note>and so
occasionally throughout play, as at TLN 1213, 2341, and
2345</note></rdg> </coll> A collation where the copy text omits a
word or passage: <coll> <ln tln="159">1.1.41</ln> <lem
resp="F2">Oliver</lem> <rdg resp="F2">Oli.</rdg> <rdg resp="F1"
omit="true"></rdg> </coll> A collation that covers a longer passage:
<coll> <ln tln="313-314">1.2.60</ln> <lem resp="Pope 1723">Come on .
. . forwardness</lem> <rdg resp="F1">Duke. Come on . . . intreated /
His owne . . . forwardnesse. <note>as verse</note></rdg> </coll>
4.6.12. Omissions and changes in font

	Use the form <rdg resp="Q1" omit="true"></rdg> for omissions. In
the display on the site this will appear as "Not in Q1." If the
omission requires more information, use a standard <note> format. Use
"<note>Not italic in Q1.</note>" to indicate an editorial change of
type font, where that change bears on a textual argument. 4.6.13.
Conjectures and readings of earlier editors

	Indicate former editors' conjectures, as distinct from
emendations, by <rdg resp="yy" conj="true">...</rdg> Use this tagging
to indicate that an emendation accepted into the text, or recorded in
the collation, is substantially that offered by a previous editor:
<lem resp="Capell" subst="yes">[Exit attendant.]</lem> 4.6.14. Line
breaks

	Indicate line breaks in a quotation, by a forward slash, thus: /
(with a space before and after). 4.6.15. Sigla

	The following is a list of sigla for general editions likely to
be collated. There will also be play-specific editions, of course,
but it is important to keep the sigla consistent across editions
where possible to allow for future exploration of editorial
practices. In general, the ISE convention is to use editors' names
for single plays (Mowatt & Werstine, not Folger; Craik, not Arden 3)
and for singly-edited complete works (Malone, Bevington), but
institutional names for complete works with multiple editors (RSC,
Oxford, Norton). Note that a lemma that originates with your own
edition should omit the resp="" part of the tag. This will be
displayed "This Edition" in the popup window. Alexander 1951
Bevington 1980 Bevington 1987 Bevington 1992 Boswell 1821 Cambridge
1863-66 Capell 1767-68 Capell, Notes 1779-83 Coleridge 1874 Collier
1842-44 Collier 1853 Collier 1858 Craig-Bevington 1973 Delius 1882
Dyce 1857 Dyce 1864-67 Evans 1974 F1 F2 1632 F3 1664 F4 1685 F5 c.
1700 Folger 1992- Hanmer 1743-44 Herford 1903 Hudson 1851-56 Hudson
1881 Johnson 1765 Keightley 1864-66 Kittredge 1936 Knight 1838-43
Malone 1790 Mason 1778 Mitford 1844 Munro 1957 Oxford 1986 Pope
1723-25 Pope 1728 Rann 1786-94 Rowe 1709 Rowe 1714 RSC 2007 Singer
1856 Sisson 1954 Staunton 1858-61 Steevens 1773 Theobald 1726
Theobald 1733 Theobald 1740 Theobald 1757 Walker 1860 Warburton 1747
Wordsworth 1883 Wright 1891 Previous | Table of Contents | Next

	Advanced display of complex variants Last modified by Maxwell
Terpstra on 2015/04/03 12:36 Comments (1) · Annotations (1) ·
Attachments (0) · History · Information Edit 1. Dynamic relineation

	Edit In some texts (Lear is a notable example), variant versions
of the text have different lineations, sometimes of quite long
passages. In others, an editor may choose to relineate prose, or (as
in the case of Pericles, for example) differ from the printed version
in the arrangement of verse lines. In their modern text, editors may
choose to provide readers with an opportunity, in each case, to view
the variant lineation. The selected passage will appear with tabs
that permit dynamic switching between the views. Line breaks in the
modern text are created by the tag <L n="[number]" />. The
alternative lineation can be indicated by any alternative line tag
("milestone"). All that is needed is to add in the appropriate place
in the collation file the information about the alternative
milestones. Here is the entry that enables a switch between Quarto
(QLN) and Folio (TLN) lines: <relineation> <ln tln="106-110"/> <use
t="tln">Folio</use> </relineation> To switch between verse and prose,
insert a "milestone" (TLNs and QLNs are milestones), defining it as
"prose" at the beginning of the speech: <MS t="prose"/><S><SP
norm="Lear">Lear</SP> Then indicate the TLN or QLN range. In this
instance the switch is from a Folio to Quarto text, where the passage
appears in prose in the Quarto: <relineation> <ln tln="335-355"/>
<use t="prose" /> </relineation> 2. Marking additional passages

	Edit Where an editor wishes to add passages from a source other
than the copy text, the additions will appear in a format that makes
their distinct origin clear, and can be "toggled" on and off by the
reader. The additional material must appear in the text itself, not
the collations (though the collations should also record the fact
that the texts vary, of course). Additions can be of short or long
passages. The only tricky part is where the addition requires
different punctuation at the beginning or end of the passage. The
necessary tags are these: <add></add> <lem></lem><lem></lem> The tag
<lem> indicates the reading of the copy text where it differs from
the addition. Where more than one witness may be referenced, you
should indicate it in the <rdg> tag. <rdg wit="[source]"></wit>
indicates the reading of the text to be added. Here is a simple
addition of a short passage: <L n="58"/><TLN n="68"/><QLN
n="58"/><S><SP>Lear</SP> Of all these bounds, even from this line to
this, <L n="59"/><TLN n="69"/><QLN n="59"/>With shady forests and
<add>with champaigns riched <L n="59.1"/><TLN n="70"/>With plenteous
rivers and </add>wide skirted meads, <L n="60"/><TLN n="71"/><QLN
n="60"/>We make thee lady. In this passage, the modern text requires
punctuation to change as the addition is displayed. The original
punctuation is indicated by <lem></lem>, the alternative by
<rdg></rdg> with the witness specified: <L n="45"/><TLN n="53"/><QLN
n="45"/>And here are to be answered. Tell me, my
daughters<add><lem>,</lem><rdg wit="F1">—</rdg> <L n="45.1"/><TLN
n="54"/>Since now we will divest us both of rule, <L n="45.2"/><TLN
n="55"/>Interest of territory, cares of state—</add> <L n="46"/><TLN
n="56"/><QLN n="46"/>Which of you shall we say doth love us most, . .
. 3. Variants of especial interest or significance

	Edit Where there are multiple texts, it is possible for the
editor to highlight variants of special interest in such a way that
they will be flagged even when variants are not being displayed. The
variant will appear when the mouse is hovered over the reading in the
modern text when annotations are visible (the default), especially if
it is an "editor's choice," an "extended" text, or (gasp) a conflated
text. An example might be the difference between Lear Q1, where
Goneril asks Regan "Pray let's hit together," and the Folio's less
aggressive "Pray let's sit together." in either extended text, the
alternative is interesting enough in terms of a critical approach to
character and the relationship between the sisters that readers will
benefit from an awareness of the variant. Here is how the "hover"
display of the variant is signaled in the annotations: <note> <ln
tln="328"/> <lem>hit</lem> <var wit="F1">sit</var> <level n="1"> The
quarto reading, <i>hit</i>, suggests that Goneril is determined to
act aggressively at the first opportunity. The folio's <i>sit</i>,
indicating a view that they should confer again at a later date, is
more cautious. </level> </note> An editor may choose the same
technique for an emendation where the original is of sufficient
interest that it might be flagged. From Henry V, the obscure original
as the Hostess describes Falstaff's death: "a Table of greene fields"
might be made to appear on mouseover where the modern text records
Theobald's emendation: "a babbled of green fields." 4. Words of
irreducible ambguity: animation

	Edit Very occasionally, a word in the copy text will present a
case where there is no clear modern spelling for the original. This
issue is not a matter of textual variants, but of textual ambiguity.
A well-known instance is the ambiguous speech prefix in the Folio
text of Lear, "Cor." Editors may choose Cornwall, or Cordelia (with
clear ideological implications in any choice), or antimate between
the two to leave the ambiguity evident for the reader. Another
instance occurs in All's Well That Ends Well, where the word "meinie"
can potentially be modernized by two quite different words, "mane,"
or "mein." To create an animated display of this ambiguity, the
editor will use the tag <ambig></ambig>, with the alternatives
indicated by sequential uses of the <rdg></rdg> tag: <L n="18"/><TLN
n="2520"/><S><SP norm="Clown">Clown</SP> Faith, sir, a has an English
<ambig><rdg>mane</rdg><rdg>mien</rdg><rdg>meinie</rdg></ambig>, but
his <TLN n="2521"/>phys'nomy is more hotter in France than there.</S>

	5. Notes and Commentary Last modified by Michael Best on
2013/12/08 17:17 Comments (0) · Annotations (0) · Attachments (0) ·
History · Information Edit The notes and commentary of the Internet
Shakespeare Editions are the place where you will most clearly be
aware of the differences between a conventional printed edition and
an electronic one. The hypertextual linking of text to notes, and
notes to further resources means that the structure of your notes
should be conceived in a significantly different way (see the
introductory remarks on hypertext above, 1.1-2). 5.1. General
considerations

	Edit Writing yet another gloss on a passage that has been
discussed in dozens of editions, several appearing in the last twenty
years, can be an exercise more in ingenious paraphrase than
scholarship. Be aware of the kinds of problems Leah Marcus and others
have identified in the long tradition of editors shaping the text
according to the expectations of earlier audiences that are by now
substantially changed in their expectations: be skeptical of the
kinds of annotations that have embedded earlier attitudes, and
exercise the capacity of the electronic text to provide the reader
with multiple choices (see 5.2.5 below for the kinds of electronic
resources you can include in your search for alternatives). If you
retain an earlier gloss, in general it is better to quote an earlier
editor who said it well, giving due credit, rather than to juggle
words in an attempt to make the annotation seem different. Note,
however, that longer quotations might run into copyright problems,
and where it is difficult to determine the original editor who made a
comment repeated by others it may be simpler to juggle. 5.1.1. Levels
of annotation

	There will be three levels of annotation and an independent
glossary. The first two levels of annotation will be accessed
immediately from the modern text. Basic annotation (level one) will
be that part of the notes primarily explanatory of meanings, at
roughly the level of one of the standard student texts (Bevington,
Norton, or Signet, for example). This level of annotation will be
used in the Broadview text, so you should be careful to make sure
that it is sufficiently detailed for a student reader; for reasons of
limitations of space, the version of the site accessed by mobile
devices will only be able to display level one annotations. Advanced
annotation (level two) will contain a more complete discussion,
roughly equivalent to current annotation in editions like the Arden
or New Cambridge. The third level will allow you to deal with
especially interesting, controversial, or complex material in a
discursive additional note. Remember, however, the injunction above
that a click should be worthwhile; the third level of annotation will
normally be a substantial discussion, and will be contained in a
separate file. The ready availability of the third level of
annotation can make the second level somewhat more concise than in
equivalent printed editions. Cross-referencing should be limited to
the second and third levels of annotation. For level three
annotations, see section 5.4. Tags indicating level follow this
format: <LEVEL="[number]">Text of annotation.</LEVEL> See Appendix,
section 2.6 for details. 5.1.2. What should be annotated

	Explain whatever seems to you to demand explanation, bearing in
mind the audience the editions are aimed at: first year university
student to advanced scholar. Normally, you should avoid glossing
difficult words more than once; you may, however, use your discretion
on this (e.g. if many scenes intervene between two or more uses).
5.1.3. Annotate in larger units when possible

	Especially in an electronic edition, fewer, more inclusive notes
will be more effective and less obtrusive for the reader. For
example, when characters indulge in a series of plays on words it
will require fewer clicks for the reader to be told in one longer
explanation when the wordplay begins, rather than explaining each pun
as it appears. See the general comments about writing good hypertext
above, 1.2.2. You will be saved work later when the Broadview version
is generated automatically from your level one notes if you consider
carefully how these will appear in print. 5.1.4. Additional Broadview
Annotation

	The Broadview volumes will be enhanced from time to time with a
more extended "level 2" annotation interleaved with the text. This
annotation should be selected to illustrate some of the additional
material that is available in the online edition, and should act as a
"teaser" to encourage students to explore the Web version. Sample
extended annotations will often relate to the additional materials
you will prepare both for the Broadview and Web editions (see 5.5 and
5.6), and might include sections of Shakespeare's source where this
interacts with the text on the facing page in an interesting way;
illustrations of performance; parallel passages from related works;
passages from contemporary works that illustrate manners or actions
in the text in a striking way; woodcuts from contemporary documents
where these illustrate some aspect of the text; and so on. 5.2. Kinds
of annotation

	Edit 5.2.1. Notes to passages that are obscure

	Where the text contains obscurities which you can neither explain
nor emend, you may choose not to refer to such obscurities in the
commentary, but you may, if you prefer, say "Unexplained" or give the
best guesses, indicating uncertainty by a question mark in
parentheses. 5.2.2. Necessary explanations of what happens on the
stage

	Where it has not seemed advisable to insert stage directions or
when further clarification is useful, you should indicate stage
"business" implied by the dialogue. 5.2.3. Comments on vocabulary and
syntax

	You should indicate where usage differs from the modern or seems
especially characteristic of Shakespeare. Vocabulary with technical
(e.g. legal, medical) associations usually requires explanation.
5.2.4. Explanations of reference to customs, events, etc.

	Customs and references to the life of the time such as are not
likely to be understood by a first-year university student should be
explained. Include references that may be familiar in Britain that
might not be clear to readers overseas, e.g. districts in London.
5.2.5. Illustrative passages from Elizabethan literature

	Use parallel passages from Elizabethan and Jacobean literature to
illustrate references, vocabulary, syntax, usage, etc. Editors should
if possible make use of the growing repositories of electronic texts
from the period and earlier, such as the Chadwyck-Healey Literature
On Line (LION) series, Ian Lancashire's Early Modern English
Dictionaries Database (EMEDD) -- now expanded to his Lexicons of
Early Modern English (LEME), and major searchable collections on the
Internet. Although the OED will often provide adequate information,
editors should check with wider references in the case of
particularly interesting word usage, since such resources as LION
will often uncover materials not included by the OED readers.
Quotations from Shakespearean plays not yet published in the Internet
Shakespeare Editions should be from a current scholarly edition, with
indication in the list of abbreviations of what edition is used.
5.2.6. Parallel passages

	If you are referring to parallel passages from classical authors,
other works by Shakespeare, proverbial lore, the Bible, etc., you
should normally provide some quotation, not simply the reference. The
space offered by an additional note will be useful here; in some
instances we may be able to link your quoted passage to the whole
work when the edition is posted on the site. 5.2.7. Alternative
meanings

	If you provide alternative meanings of a word or phrase, indicate
which is the primary meaning and which is innuendo or association.
Bawdy innuendo, especially in an extensively bawdy scene, may require
tactful handling but should not be glossed over or dealt with so
circumspectly that meanings are obscure. Sometimes a single
comprehensive note at the beginning of such a passage can indicate a
succession of bawdy connotations, rather than itemizing each. 5.2.8.
Biblical quotations and allusions

	Biblical quotations should be from the Geneva Bible, preferably
in folio editions subsequent to the revision of the NT by Laurence
Tomson, 1576, whose completely new marginalia, full of
suggestiveness, tend to be badly cropped in quartos. Biblical
allusions should be glossed; you will be wise to assume that the
current generation of university students is fundamentally ungodly.
5.2.9. Classical allusions

	Classical allusions should be explained, if necessary with a
brief synopsis of the myth or figure referred to. It will often be
useful to refer to Shakespeare's source for the allusion. 5.2.9.
Foreign languages

	Quotations from classical or other non-English authors should
normally be in the original language, surrounded by the tags <FOREIGN
lang="[language]"> </FOREIGN>, followed by a translation. Greek words
must be transliterated, since most browsers are at present unable to
display Greek characters. Foreign-language passages should be
translated 5.2.10 Headnotes

	A headnote at the beginning of each scene may be used for brief
comment on such matters as editorial notes of location; the dramatic
significance of the sequence and juxtaposition of scenes; the
relation of the scene to particular sections of known sources. Number
such a headnote from the first TLN number of the scene, with the
addition of a zero after a period, thus: <TLN n="1202.0"> where the
first line is TLN 1202. 5.2.11 Illustration of performance

	You are encouraged to comment on interesting issues in the text
as they may be illuminated by specific performances. Where you are
able to obtain copyright permission for graphics, these should be
linked from the level two note; it is often possible, however, to
indicate variations in performance traditions by referring to
specific productions on stage or film without actual illustration.
Previous | Table of Contents | Next

	5.3. Format of annotations Last modified by Maxwell Terpstra on
2015/04/03 13:00 Comments (0) · Annotations (0) · Attachments (0) ·
History · Information Edit The format for annotations follows closely
the format for collations (see 4.6.9). You will receive a template
into which you can insert your annotations. You may work in your
normal word processor, using it to create italic, bold, or
superscript type. Section 5.3.2 lists the minimal tagging that will
be needed in addition to that already included in the template.
5.3.1. The template

	The template provides this ready-made format: <note> <ln
tln="TLN">lineNumber</ln> <lem>lemma</lem> <level n="1"> levelOneNote
</level> <level n="2"> levelTwoNote </level> </note> a) Each
annotation is surrounded by the tags <note> . . . </note>. b) The TLN
can be a single number, a number with a decimal addition, or a range
of numbers. The decimal addition is needed for lines where the Folio
has no equivalent (in plays where a quarto is the copy text, for
example). Where an added stage direction should appear on a separate
line, provide it with a decimal TLN, incrementally from the last one,
and make sure that this number is also added to your text. c) The
line number is the line of the current scene (you do not need to
include act and scene numbers). Again, for a range of numbers use the
full number at the start and end of the range. d) A lemma can be a
single word, a phrase, or a longer section indicated by ellipsis
(three periods separated by spaces). The lemma is not only the word
or phrase for which there is commentary, but also the "anchor" which
the reader will click on to see the annotation. For this reason, it
is important that you design the lemma with four points in mind: A
single-word lemma must be long enough to permit clear visibility of
the underline that indicates an annotation, and to permit easy
clicking. Thus, for example, a single "I" or "a" should be avoided;
add a second word to the lemma, or extend it to a short phrase. Since
the computer will find the first example of the lemma in a given TLN
range, the lemma must be unambiguous. If a word is repeated in a
line, and you are referring to the second instance, you should again
include an additional word before or after. In this instance, the
lemma <lem>fair</lem> would be inadequate, since it is the second
instance of the word that is being annotated; the solution is to
gloss the phrase. The text: <TLN n="208"/>Speak, fair, but speak fair
words, or else be mute. The note, in its unambiguous form: <note> <ln
tln="208"/> <lem>fair words,</lem> <level n="1">Kind words.</level>
</note> When you indicate a longer passage using ellipsis, the
annotation will be linked from the first part of the passage, before
the ellipsis. Thus this initial section of the lemma must be of
sufficient length and must similarly be unambiguous. Finally, when
your XML is converted to a Word document for Broadview, the last part
of an elipsis will be used to anchor the conventional footnote, so it
too must be unique within the TLN. NOTE 1: it is very important that
the lemma is exactly the same as it is recorded in your edition,
including any capitalization and final punctuation. Otherwise the
computer will not be able to match it, and there will be an error.
The safest way to ensure accuracy is to copy and paste from your
edition, making sure to update any collations should you later revise
your modern text. Do not use any tagging in the lemma. NOTE 2: since
the lemma becomes the text the user clicks on to see the annotation,
you must avoid overlapping lemmas. This may take some careful wording
if you wish both to comment on an individual word, and a longer
section it initiates. The best tactic will often to make the word
itself the subject of a level one note, and to address the larger
issue as a level two note in the same overall annotation. 5.3.2.
Additional tagging needed within the annotations

	Items to be tagged within the body of a note include longer
quotations, which should be tagged <blockquote></blockquote>. Use
these tags only if the quotation is long enough to be set off from
the surrounding passage. If you use Word as a word processor, you may
use its italics (and superscripts). 5.3.3. Examples of annotations

	Please ensure that your annotation file includes an accurate note
of the most recent revision in the file name so that you can be sure
not to work on an older file. Example: Cym_M_annotations
2006-08-11.rtf The lemma should not include tagging. When a phrase
(or more) is cited, only the first and last words, separated by three
dots, need be given. The dots should be separated by a space from
each other and from the surrounding words. In these examples italics
are represented by tags, converted from the italics of the original
word processor document. A note indicating the implied location of a
scene: <note> <ln tln="1">0.1</ln> <lem>[1.1]</lem> <level
n="1">Location: Oliver's orchard or garden.</level> </note> A note
with both level 1 and level 2 comments: <note> <ln tln="97">10</ln>
<lem>sterile curse.</lem> <level n="1">Curse of sterility.</level>
<level n="2">On "location of effect," see Hope, 47-49. Plutarch
reports the fertility hopes associated with the Lupercalia (522), but
Shakespeare invents Caesar's remark to Antony about Calpurnia's
barrenness. The comment indicates the failure of Caesar's dynastic
hope (he did not in fact leave any legitimate heirs of his own
begetting), and it misogynistically ignores the possibility of his
own infertility.</level> </note> (Here the reference to Plutarch can
be linked directly to the source passage in the supplementary
materials accompanying the edition.) A level 2 note covering a range
of text: <note> <ln tln="27-30">18</ln> <lem>Truly . . . them.</lem>
<level n="2">Bate suggests a bawdy pun on <i>awl</i> and<i>penis,</i>
referring to a similar pun in Dekker's <i>Shoemaker's Holiday</i>,
which was staged earlier in 1599 <i>cobbler's</i> 462).</level>
</note> A note that includes a verse quotation: <note> <ln
tln="133-138"/> <lem>Were I hard-favored . . . why dost abhor
me?</lem> <level n="2">Prince compares these lines to the following:
<blockquote> He is deformed, crooked, old, and sere,<br/> Ill-fac'd,
worse bodied, shapeless every where;<br/> Vicious, ungentle, foolish,
blunt, unkind,<br/> Stigmatical in making, worse in mind.<br/>
(<i>Err.</i> 4.2.19-22). </blockquote> </level> </note> Where a note
applies to more than one instance, do not include the additional TLNs
in the TLN tag, but put it in the body of the note. In this example,
the reference to the OED is placed in the level two note in order to
leave the Broadview note in a simpler format: <note> <ln tln="2771"/>
<lem>Stay</lem> <level n="1">Wait.</level> <level n="2"><i>OED</i> v.
9); see also TLN 2773.</level> </note> 5.3.4. Paraphrase

	Idiomatic paraphrases of sentences or phrases offered in the
notes, as opposed to literal renderings, should be presented within
quotation marks. 5.3.5. Incomplete sentences

	Where a commentary note is not a complete sentence, Broadview/ISE
style dictates that it should begin with a captial letter, and end
with a period. Level two notes should where possible be complete
sentences. 5.3.6. Line references (format)

	Line references (here and throughout) follow MLA style. Use both
numbers for figures under 100: 20-26 (not 20-6), 11-17, 18-89. For
figures above 100 use the last two numbers only, unless more are
necessary: 103-04, 122-37, 189-226. Note that this rule does not
apply to line references contained within tags (see above, 5.3.1.b).
5.3.7. References to stage directions

	When cross-referencing stage directions in your commentary (or
introduction), style the cross-reference as follows, for example:
"see 3.5.1-2 SD above," where the stage direction in question begins
the scene, and occupies two lines. The use of "SD," should avoid any
confusion as to whether you might be referring to dialogue. Within a
scene, you can say "see 5 SD above," meaning a stage direction within
line 5, not following it; otherwise simply give the line number.
5.3.8. References to words in the text.

	When citing words in the text, italicize them rather than putting
them in quotations marks: <note> <ln tln="42">34</ln>
<lem>Leonatus</lem> <level n="1">Literally, "lion-born."</level>
<level n="2">As a proper name, <i>Leonatus</i> also appeared in
Sidney's <i>Arcadia</i> (<i>pace</i> <i>OED</i>), and Leonnatus was a
officer of Alexander the Great.</level> </note> (Remember that you
can enter these words as italic in your word processor; the tags <i>
and </i> will be generated automatically from your file.) 5.3.10.
Quotations from other works

	Quotations in annotations should, except for good reason, follow
the spelling and punctuation of the edition cited. Editors are urged
to use reliable modernized editions wherever possible. The spelling
of book titles, in the notes and in the bibliography, should also
follow the spelling of the edition cited. 5.3.11. Closing punctuation

	All commentary notes should end with a period. 5.3.12. Spelling

	See above in the section on modernization of spelling for a list
of spellings in US English, section 4.4.4.c. Previous | Table of
Contents | Next

	5.4. Level three notes Last modified by Michael Best on
2014/05/03 16:53 Comments (0) · Annotations (0) · Attachments (0) ·
History · Information Edit 5.4.1. The purpose of level three notes

	A typical level three note will fulfil a function similar in a
print edition to an appendix that deals with a particularly knotty
problem or an interesting topic that would overflow the normal
constraint of a level two pop-up window. The note may look at a
particularly complex textual issue, or an extensive discussion of a
performance crux in a play, for example. 5.4.2. The format of level
three notes

	All level three notes will be recorded in a single file, with the
name "[play abbreviation]_footnotes.xml" (Jn_footnotes.xml, for
example). The Coordinating Editor will format the file when you have
completed your notes. The footnotes file will be divided into
sections, each of which is a discrete footnote; links to a particular
footnote will open at the appropriate section. The advantages of this
format are threefold: The electronic space will allow you to expand
more fully than the confines of print on issues that are particularly
interesting or challenging. Since the file is seen by the computer as
similar to an introductory essay, you can do everything with a level
three note that you can with your essays: embed links, images, videos
-- and even have footnotes (levels one and two!) to the level three
note. If you so wish, you can organize your level three notes so that
they form a coherent narrative, such that a reader can focus on the
notes as a separate document. This format would make your notes into,
in effect, an essay. For an example of this approach, see the
'Historical Notes on the reign of King John', an essay that is
treated as a series of level three notes to the annotations on the
characters in the play. 5.4.3. Linking to level three notes

	As in all essays, level three notes will have numbered
paragraphs. To link to the note, treat the number of the paragraph as
a TLN, and link to the first paragraph in your note. As an example, a
link will take this format for a note in King John that links to the
third note, which happens to start at paragraph 14: <ilink
component="text" href="Jn/footnotes#tln-14">See the full
passage</ilink>. Until you are sure that your notes are in a final
state, with securely numbered paragraphs, you can substitute a
placeholder number, as you would in a print volume: <ilink
component="text" href="Jn/footnotes#tln-00">See the full
passage</ilink>. Previous | Table of Contents | Next

	6. Supporting Materials Last modified by Michael Best on
2013/12/08 17:20 Comments (0) · Annotations (0) · Attachments (0) ·
History · Information Edit ISE editions are enriched by in-depth
introductory discussions and additional materials, mainly from Early
Modern sources, that complement both the scholarly and pedagogical
value of the editions. On the Web, the standard critical introduction
is replaced by a number of separate, interlinked essays; these will
be condensed and reorganized for the needs of the Broadview edition.
6.1. General considerations

	Edit A traditional introduction to an edition does not normally
exceed 18,000 words, including the discussion of the text, the stage
history, and a critical discussion of the play. While the Broadview
version of the play will have an introduction of this kind, aimed at
the introductory university/college student, the Web version will
break this structure into its component parts; while there will not
be the same constraint on space a printed edition demands, editors
should make every attempt to make their material accessible and
compact. Few readers will read extensive material on the screen; thus
you must make it easy for readers to find the material that they are
searching for, and if you are to persuade them to download and print
out your work for more leisurely consultation you may choose to adopt
some of the more respectable strategies of the journalist, such as
the "hook" that rouses interest, and a clarity of style to keep your
readers interested. The appropriate effect can be achieved without
compromising the intellectual level of the discussion. 6.1.1.
Hypertext again

	There are at least two ways of using the hypertext structure of
the Internet to make your critical and historical materials readily
accessible to your readers. From an initial table of contents, break
your material up into logical sections, each of which is of modest
length. Thus you can construct a linear argument, each logical "page"
leading to the next, but readers can branch directly to the specific
subject that interests them if they so desire. An example might be in
a stage history divided into general periods (Renaissance,
Restoration, eighteenth-century, Romantic, and so on), where one
reader might choose to look only at one period, and another might
look at them all. It will be possible to make the whole essay
available in a linear format on the site, as well as its logical
sections, if you would prefer to retain this option. Write a single,
compact essay, with branches to additional material. Thus in your
survey of criticism you might wish to choose three or four especially
significant critics, representative of their times; the body of the
essay would provide a summary, with detailed discussion of the
highlighted critics in separate, short pieces.  You will find an
interesting discussion of some questions raised by the use of
hypertext in critical essays in the article by Laurie Osborne: "SAA
Hyperessay on Electronic Shakespearean Criticism" at
http://www.colby.edu/personal/leosborn/open.html (though its
interface now seems quaintly dated). 6.1.2. Length of essays

	In general you would be wise to avoid asking your readers to load
larger files, since these are difficult to read on screen; in any
case, you should remember to use headings and sub-headings freely,
since this will allow for the creation of an initial table of
contents at the head of the discussion, from which readers can branch
immediately if they so wish. 6.1.3. Footnotes and documentation

	In addition to the interconnection of self-contained hypertext
additions to your essays, you will probably want to include more
traditional footnotes. You will, in effect, have three levels of
documentation: a) In-text citation

	Where possible, limit documentation to parenthetical citation in
the text; all citations will be linked to the appropriate document if
it is part of the edition, to the Bibliography if it is not. b)
Footnotes at the end of the same document

	Where discursive or explanatory comment is needed, you can either
create a short note at the bottom of your document, linked
internally, or make a separate file. The test should be both the
length of the note, and its value to the reader as a separate file to
be loaded. Notes at the end of the document should be limited to at
most a few sentences. c) Longer notes or essays linked to your main
document

	Longer comments, discursive notes, linked essays and so on should
be created in separate files which will be linked to the main body of
your discussion. The degree of flexibility here is considerable; it
is advisable, however, not to create separate long notes to long
notes for fear of losing your readers in hyperspace. You can, however
provide links to other essays, sources and so on. Quotations from
other works should, except for good reason, follow the spelling and
punctuation of the edition cited. Editors are urged to use reliable
modernized editions wherever possible. The spelling of book titles,
in the notes and in the bibliography, should also follow the spelling
of the edition cited. 6.1.4. Indicating links and cross-references in
the essays and supplementary materials

	Put all requests for links in angle brackets so they are readily
found as the files are being prepared for the Web. Put a link of this
kind at the beginning of all works that are to be linked from the
text: Example: <Link from TLN 337> This kind of link is especially
important when, for example, you wish a source document to be linked
from your annotations. You may wish to link to a part of a longer
document: Example: <Link to Rosalynde [enough information for us to
find the spot in the text]> Your essays, annotations, and source
documents may include images, in which case the appropriate format
will be this: Example: <Link to image [enough information for us to
locate it (often a file name)]> It will be helpful if you keep a file
of all such links and submit it with your work. 6.1.5. Electronic
resources

	ISE texts should take full advantage of the wealth of reference
materials now becoming available on the Internet. While the trusty
OED will remain the standard for historical references to word usage,
you should consult, where appropriate, such online resources as the
Lexicons of Early Modern English (LEME) at the University of Toronto,
and the vast, if not always fully accurate, "textbase" provided by
Literature Online (LION). LION is available by subscription only;
while LEME has a version of the site open to all users, a fuller
search interface is available for subscribers. If your institution
does not have a subscription, contact the Coordinating Editor. LEME
is especially useful for seeing how less usual words were understood
in the period. It cross-lists words found in early lexicons, lists of
"hard words," and foreign language dictionaries; thus words will be
associated with what were considered to be synonyms. The advanced
search screen on LION permits rapid access to examples of word usage
across many plays, poems, and prose works from the Early Modern
period. Both resources use old spelling, with the result that it is
important to make multiple searches, or to learn to use each site's
"wild card" searches in order to access the full range of examples
available. Previous | Table of Contents | Next

	6.2. Introductory essays Last modified by Michael Best on
2013/12/08 17:22 Comments (0) · Annotations (0) · Attachments (0) ·
History · Information Edit 6.2.1. A textual introduction

	This essay will permit you to explain and justify your general
editorial approach to the text, and to discuss salient major points
of contention. You may choose to explore particular cruxes in
independent appendices, linked both to this essay and to a level 2
note in the text itself. 6.2.2. A survey of critical approaches to
the play

	The survey should cover the critical reception to the play since
its first performance to the present day. Where it is possible for
you to assemble an anthology of critical materials (see below), the
items in it should be linked to the survey. 6.2.3. A stage history

	Like the critical survey, the stage history of the play should
cover the period from its first performance to the present. For some
plays there is an embarrassment of riches; you should select
representative performances to illustrate general tendencies in the
earlier periods, and the most influential or controversial in more
recent times. Your discussion of the history of performance will be a
good opportunity for you to include graphic materials, where
copyright can be obtained, and perhaps some video clips. 6.2.4. A
critical discussion of the play

	This will be your opportunity to bring the insight you have
gathered from your study of the play to a wider audience. Like the
other essays in the edition, the critical discussion should be
structured to use the medium of hypertext effectively. 6.2.5. A
discussion of computer analyses of the play

	This section of the edition is optional, or can be contributed by
a scholar who specializes in the subject. 6.2.6. The Broadview
Introduction

	The separate Web essays enumerated above will be reorganized and
edited into an introduction of 30-50 book pages (approx 13,500-22,500
words); the main focus should be on critical approaches to the play,
your own critical discussion, and the stage history. Previous | Table
of Contents | Next

	6.3. Supplementary materials Last modified by Michael Best on
2013/12/08 17:23 Comments (0) · Annotations (0) · Attachments (0) ·
History · Information Edit The electronic space permits virtually
unlimited room for the provision of additional materials of value to
the edition. All of these can be directly linked from the modern text
of the play—and of course can be linked back to any of the versions
of the text. The Broadview edition requires that editors prepare
selected materials drawn from the full Web edition and modify them as
appropriate so as to produce page volumes for Broadview Press that
are consistent with the principles of other Broadview Editions
intended for university students and educated general readers. These
will include annotated appendices amounting to between 50 and 100
book pages (or approximately 22,500-45,000 words) of background
materials (most commonly, source materials, documents relating to the
historical and intellectual context of the play, documents relating
to the play's staging, and documents relating to the critical
reception of the play). The background material shall not include
modern critical essays and as a general rule shall not include
material that is sufficiently recent so as to be under copyright.
Broadview also requires each text to include a chronology and a
bibliography. Many Early Modern materials are already published
online in electronic versions, and some of these provide
freely-available texts you can use as a basis for your own. Look
especially at the resources of Project Gutenberg and Renascence
Editions: ​http://www.gutenberg.org/ and
​http://www.uoregon.edu/~rbear/ren.htm. 6.3.1. Source materials

	One of the major strengths of the Internet Shakespeare Editions
will be the ability of the Editor (or collaborators) to provide
extensive excerpts from Shakespeare's sources, and other contemporary
materials that in one way or another illuminate the text. In due
course a library of early literature will be developed, of which many
files will be of use in more than one play. Plutarch, Holinshed, and
Ovid are obvious examples. The supplementary materials to be included
in the Broadview version of the play will usually include
pedagogically useful sections of Shakespeare's sources. For this
reason, materials should be lightly annotated to facilitate
understanding by a University/College?student. Source material may be
abbreviated where necessary by omission or summary (in square
brackets). You may use old spelling if you prefer, with a minimum of
editorial alteration (collated where necessary), but you should
modernize u/v, i/j and long s; expand contractions; and normalize
unusual typography. Give foreign language sources in translation,
with an indication where the original may be found. 6.3.2.
Illustrative contemporary documents from the period

	You are encouraged to include documents and contemporary
illustrations of materials that inform our understanding of specific
issues within the plays; a selection of these will be published in
the Broadview version of your text. Written materials not yet in the
electronic public domain may be re-edited; copyright permission must
be obtained for graphics. A good example of an edition that provides
a wide range of supporting documentation is Frances E. Dolan's
edition of The Taming of the Shrew (Bedford Books of St Martin's
Press: Boston, 1996). The Broadview version of the play will include
pedagogically useful selections from these documents. 6.3.3. An
annotated bibliography

	The intention here is to provide scholars and students with a
flexible tool for deciding what further reading they may wish to
pursue. The bibliography should be comprehensive, and should include
influential or typical earlier works, as well as more detailed
selections from works written in the last thirty years. The
annotations should give the reader a general sense both of the
material covered and the approach taken by the author. Each entry
will be accompanied by keywords that will assist the reader in
searching (see Appendix A, section 4). 6.3.4. Graphics, sound, video

	Guidelines for the inclusion of illustrative materials in
graphic, sound, and video formats will be developed as the site is
established. All materials of this kind will be accompanied by
explanatory text, from a simple caption to an extended discussion,
and all will be tagged with keywords that will assist a user in a
search. It will be important to include as much information about the
material as possible. It is your responsibility to obtain
photographic prints (and permissions to reproduce them) for any
illustrations or facsimiles that you wish to include. Contact the
Coordinating Editor on the format for submitting graphic material. In
the collection of multimedia materials, it is important to keep full
records of their provenance. Some of the best sites on the Internet
which deal with multimedia are showing the way to an effective system
of archiving the materials. See the ISE's database of Shakespeare in
Performance
(http://internetshakespeare.uvic.ca/Theater/sip/index.html) and the
Performing Arts Data Service at ​http://www.pads.ahds.ac.uk/ for good
examples. 6.3.5. File formats

	As we plan for the future of the site, we are archiving all
multimedia data in high quality formats wherever possible, to allow
for future advances in the quality of Internet connections, and the
possibility of upgrading our materials. In all cases, we will save
files you send to us in whatever format they arrive (though we prefer
the formats listed below); we will, if necessary, re-encode them in
our standard format for archival purposes. Editors curious to find
out more about the various formats will find that the Wikipedia gives
up-to-date and reliable information. a) Graphics

	Where possible, provide scanned images for your graphics. If you
do not have facilities for scanning, the ISE will do them for you, so
long as you provide high quality copies (not Xeroxes) of the images.
The preferred file format is TIFF, scanned at 600 dots per inch
(dpi), since this will provide archival copies of sufficient quality
for printing. Broadview images should be provided at this resolution
or higher. Files of this size are very large, and will have to be
submitted on CDs or DVDs. If you are unable to provide TIFF files,
JPEG files will do, so long as they are saved at high quality. b)
Sound

	The ideal format for sound files is in AIFF or WAV format since
these are essentially lossless, but you may submit files in the
popular MP3 or (preferably) AAC (Advanced Audio Coding) compressed
formats; in these formats they should ideally be high quality (high
bitrate). c) Video

	Video formats are still in a state of some flux, especially
because the "aspect ratio" (the relationship between height and
width) of the image is by no means stable or constant. At the time of
writing this version of the Guidelines (February 2008), we will be
putting videos online using the proprietary format Flash (as used
currently on sites like YouTube), but will be archiving them in the
much more stable (and bulky) DV format. 6.3.5. A glossary

	One of the things that computers do well is indexing. You should
compile a glossary for two kinds of users: the student who needs
assistance with unfamiliar words you do not wish to annotate on each
appearance, and the scholar who seeks information about Shakespeare's
usage. Each word should appear in the glossary in its normalized
form, with a selected list of occasions it is used. References, as
elsewhere, should follow the guidelines for cross-references in
Appendix A, section 3. 6.3.6. Appendices

	Consult your Coordinating Editor well before submitting your
material about the number, kind, and length of appendices. These may
include: a) Settings for songs, when available. It is your
responsibility to submit the setting in final, scan-ready form. b)
Recording of the copy text lineation, where that is frequently
different from the editor's. If an appendix is used for this purpose,
the information should not be duplicated in the collation. 6.3.7. An
anthology of criticism

	An area where the Internet Shakespeare Editions will have a great
advantage over printed editions will be in the capacity for providing
additional critical and scholarly discussions of the play. The
anthology should begin with the earliest reactions to the play and
continue, copyright permitting, to the present day. There are
virtually no limits to the amount of material that can be put on the
site; the Survey of Critical Approaches to the play should, however,
provide a starting point for readers, and give an overview of the
material that is available in the anthology (see 6.2. above). Early
critics can relatively easily be included from early out-of-copyright
editions with the help of OCR (Optical Character Recognition)
scanning; the Coordinating Editor may be able to provide assistance
in creating the basic files to be proofread. More recent writings
will be more of a challenge, but you will find that in many cases
authors will be glad to gain the additional public offered by the
universality of the Internet Shakespeare Editions. Critical articles
will be linked to the plays as appropriate (where passages are
referred to or quoted), and to each other. You should also include a
list of keywords at the beginning of each passage that will allow for
searching for particular periods, authors, kinds of criticism and so
on. 6.3.8. Annotations of supplementary materials

	Broadview requires that supplementary materials be lightly
annotated for pedagogical use. Gloss difficult or archaic words,
keeping such annotation to a reasonable minimum. Enclose the gloss
within double curly brackets in the location that you would place a
footnote, thus: Then he got vp on a gallant brave steed, The which
was worth angels{{gold coins with the figure of an angel on one
side}} ten; With a mantle of green, most brave to be seen, He left
all his merry men. Previous | Table of Contents | Next

	7. Abbreviations and Minor Points of Style Last modified by
Michael Best on 2014/03/13 10:21 Comments (0) · Annotations (0) ·
Attachments (0) · History · Information Edit All editors should
consult the MLA Handbook for details of style; where this is silent,
refer to the The Chicago Manual of Style. 14th ed. (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1993). 7.1. List of abbreviations

	Edit You should provide a file that lists the abbreviations you
have used, apart from familiar usages such as "ed.," "fol.," "conj.."
Remember that the electronic format does not force you to cramp your
space, so where it does not involve inelegant repetition or wordiness
you can spell items out in full. 7.1.1. Shakespeare's plays

	For abbreviated titles of works by Shakespeare, please use the
following abbreviations and record them in your list of abbreviations
(they are the standard ones listed in the MLA Handbook, listed here
as a computer will sort them). Note the additional abbreviations for
quartos of multiple texts. 1H4	The First Part of King Henry the
Fourth 1H6	The First Part of King Henry the Sixth 2H4	The
Second Part of King Henry the Fourth 2H6	The Second Part of King
Henry the Sixth 3H6	The Third Part of King Henry the Sixth
Ado	Much Ado About Nothing Ant	Antony and Cleopatra
AWW	All's Well That Ends Well AYL	As You Like It
Cor	Coriolanus Cym	Cymbeline Edw	Edward III Err	The
Comedy of Errors H5	King Henry the Fifth H8	King Henry the
Eighth Ham	Hamlet JC	Julius Caesar Jn	King John LC	A
Lover's Complaint LLL	Love's Labour's Lost Lr	King Lear
Luc	The Rape of Lucrece Mac	Macbeth MM	Measure for Measure
MND	A Midsummer Night's Dream MV	The Merchant of Venice
Oth	Othello Per	Pericles PhT	The Phoenix and Turtle
PP	The Passionate Pilgrim R2	King Richard the Second R3	King
Richard the Third Rom	Romeo and Juliet Shr	The Taming of the
Shrew Son	Sonnets STM	Sir Thomas Mor TGV	The Two Gentlemen
of Verona Tim	Timon of Athens Tit	Titus Andronicus Tmp	The
Tempest TN	Twelfth Night TNK	The Two Noble Kinsmen
Tro	Troilus and Cressida Ven	Venus and Adonis Wiv	The Merry
Wives of Windsor WT	The Winter's Tale -----	-----
Ham_Q1	Hamlet (Q1) Ham_Q2	Hamlet (Q2) Ham_F1	Hamlet (Folio)
Lr_Q1	King Lear (Quarto) Lr_F1	King Lear (Folio) Wiv_Q1	The
Merry Wives of Windsor (Quarto) Wiv_F1	The Merry Wives of Windsor
(Folio) Oth_Q1	Othello (Quarto) Oth_F1	Othello (Folio)
Rom_Q1	Romeo and Juliet (Q1) Rom_Q2	Romeo and Juliet (Q2)
7.1.2. QME and DRE plays

	Plays published by the Queen's Men Editions and Digital
Renaissance Editions will each have a short, unique, identifier. As
with ISE plays, these can be further identified: in addition to
quarto, folio, and modern versions, they may use MS for manuscript.
Plays published to date. QME

	FV	The Famous Victories of Henry V FBFB	Friar Bacon and
Friar Bungay Leir	The History of King Leir 3L3L	The Three Lords
and Three Ladies of London OWT	The Old Wives Tale TRKJ	The
Troublesome Reign of King John TTR3	The True Tragedy of Richard
III DRE

	WoB	The Whore of Babylon 7.1.3. Other works

	For other works and plays not by Shakespeare, abbreviate only if
you are referring to them continuously, in which case you should use
generally recognized abbreviations, e.g. SMT (Second Maiden's
Tragedy), Span. Trag. (The Spanish Tragedy), etc., and list them in
the Abbreviations. Remember, however, that in the electronic world
you are not limited by space, so can spell works out in full even if
you refer to them frequently. Where works are published by the
Queen's Men Editions or Digital Renaissance Editions, use the
abbreviation for plays in those series in all links even if you use a
different form in your introductory materials. 7.1.4. Other common
forms of abbreviation

	Where possible, follow MLA style. a) Examples of common
abbreviations used for in-text citation: (OED Boggle v. 3) Note that
the abbreviations ("n.," "v.," etc.) in OED citations should be
italic. (Note also that ISE style prefers a to sb.) (Dent W241)
(Tilley C696) (Abbott 334) (North 306). Book or article with page
reference. (Bullough 2: 122). Book with more than one volume.
Marlowe, I Tamburlaine, Prologue Ham. 3.3.15 (TLN 2288) [with ilink:
(<ilink component="text" href="Ham/EM#tln-2288>TLN 2288</ilink>)]
(Wells, Re-Editing 87). Book where the author has more than one entry
in your Bibliograpy. (Hunter, "Flatcaps," 18-20). Article where the
author has more than one entry in your Bibliograpy. (Textual
Introduction 11). Paragraph 11 of your Textual Introduction. (2
Peter, 3.13). (Ovid, Metamorphoses 13.640-78) Use commas in
abbreviated references, thus: ." . . in SMT, 3.4.5, it is . . ." (not
." . . in SMT 3.4.5 it is . . .). b) Recto and verso Recto and verso
folios (etc.) should be designated by "r" and "v," using roman, not
italic, letters. Thus: fol. 6v.; Sig. A1r. 7.1.5. Abbreviations that
need not be listed

	Specific abbreviations you may use (but which are not to be
included in the list of abbreviations): adj. (adjective) adv.
(adverb) c. (circa) ch. (chapter) ed. and edd. (editor, edition;
editors, editions) f. (following page or line) ff. (following pages
or lines) fol. and fols. (folio, folios) e.g. (for example) (not to
be followed by a comma) i.e. (id est: that is) n. (note) Thus: line
63n. line 63n.5 n. (noun) (preferred to sb.) no. (number) OED Oxford
English Dictionary SD (stage direction) SP (speech prefix) st.
(stanza) UP University Press v. (verb) vol. and vols. (volume,
volumes) Do not abbreviate "cited"; do not use v. (for "vide"); where
necessary use "see." Do not use sv. Other abbreviations commonly
found in OED citations that may be used when quoting such citations
include: ppl., adj., int., pa., pple., vbl., arch., dial., poss.,
pron., obs., conj., quasi-sb., sig., sigs. Previous | Table of
Contents | Next

	7.2. Minor points of style Last modified by Michael Best on
2013/12/08 17:25 Comments (0) · Annotations (0) · Attachments (0) ·
History · Information Edit 7.2.1. Titles

	If you choose to abbreviate titles of periodicals and standard
works of reference, do so without internal stops: RES, TLS, SQ, etc.,
not R.E.S., T.L.S., S.Q., Use standard abbreviations found in the
PMLA Bibliography, for example, and list in the Abbreviations. 7.2.2.
Text of Shakespeare quoted

	Indicate the text of Shakespeare (for those plays not yet
published in the Internet Shakespeare Editions) and the translation
of the Bible you use. 7.2.3. Names of authors

	In referring to authors, editors, etc., use the full name,
without any honorific on the first occurrence, and the surname only
thereafter, thus: "Muriel Bradbrook" (first occurrence; not Prof.);
"Bradbrook" (thereafter). This rule need not apply to formal
acknowledgments in the preliminary matter, etc. 7.2.4. Full stops

	MLA recommends that periods not be used with abbreviations
composed of capitals; a period will normally follow an abbreviation
that ends with a lower case letter: OED, MS (manuscript), references
like SP and SD ("speech prefix" and "stage direction"), and plays
like 2H4 (Henry IV, Part 2; compare Ham.). You may choose to omit the
period after common abbreviations like Mr, Ms, St (Saint). 7.2.5.
Possessive plurals

	Use --'s for the possessive in names ending in --s, thus: Davis's
(not Davis'). Descartes's. (In the play-text, meter may sometimes
call for modification of this rule.) 7.2.6. Plurals of numbers and
abbreviations

	Do not use an apostrophe for the plurals of numbers or
abbreviations: the 1590s, PhDs. 7.2.7. Brackets within brackets

	The use of in-text citation referring to your Bibliography should
reduce the need for complex levels of brackets. When, however, it is
necessary, you should follow the MLA style, using square brackets
within round brackets. 7.2.8. Capitalization

	In citing titles of articles and books, use initial capitals for
the main words. A list of the kinds of words to be capitalized will
be found in the MLA Handbook, 2.6.1. Capitalize such words as
Medieval, Renaissance, Reformation, Protestant, Catholic (unless it
is a matter of catholic taste), and the Church (as an institution).
7.2.9. Ellipsis

	Use three dots (spaced from the previous and following words and
spaced between the dots) to indicate an omission in text or
quotations (a fourth dot is used for a full stop before or after the
omitted material.) 7.2.10. Quotation marks

	Use double quotation marks. Use single quotation marks only
within material already set off by single quotation marks. Follow the
MLA style with final punctuation: comma and period always come before
the closing quotation mark unless followed by a parenthetical
citation; semicolon, colon, question mark and exclamation mark come
within the final quotation mark if they form part of the quoted
material, outside if they do not. 7.2.11. Commas in a series

	Use a comma before the final "and" in a series: Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego. 7.2.12. Pronouns referring to god

	As in the heading, the ISE style is to use lower case for
references to god, and to use lower case for pronouns referring to
him or her. Previous | Table of Contents | Next

	APPENDIX: Tags Last modified by Michael Best on 2015/03/09 09:31
Comments (0) · Annotations (0) · Attachments (0) · History ·
Information Edit The objective of this tagging scheme is to make the
task of creating effectively tagged texts that are at the same time
reasonably readable. The tags are based on the similar conventions in
HTML; at a later stage the files will be converted to both XML and
HTML versions automatically. Editors will be provided with "base"
texts with much of the tagging in place. A 1. Renaissance texts:
Folio, quartos

	Edit This tag set is derived originally from the "Encoding
Guidelines" for the Renaissance Electronic Texts, developed by Ian
Lancashire. The XML version was developed by Peter van Hardenberg.
Please note that all tags supplied in the base texts should be
carefully proofread. Where an editor wishes to add additional
information not anticipated by these tags, he or she should
correspond with the Coordinating Editor to see if the tagset should
be expanded. In general, however, it will be sufficient to add the
additional information in the form of a comment, using the SGML/HTML
convention of the exclamation mark followed by two hyphens, thus:
<!-- NOTE: there is a printing ambiguity in the Hinman facsimile. The
previous word may be "quallitie" or "quallirie". --> The comment is
closed by two hyphens before the final angle bracket. A 1.1. Header

	Each document will have a "header" providing metadata about the
document as a whole. The structure of the metadata conforms to the
Dublin Core standard, with some additional items developed
specifically for ISE texts. Metadata describe in detail the
provenance of the text, the names of those involved in developing it,
and a list of tags and abbreviations used. The header will be
compiled by the Coordinating Editor from information supplied by the
editor. There is a complete description of the metadata on this page.
A 1.2. Structural elements

	<WORK> </WORK>	The XML document root for all texts. <ACT
n="[number]"> </ACT>	Act division as in the modern edition. <SCENE
n="[number]"> </SCENE>	Scene division as in the modern edition.
Note: In plays with a non-diegetic chorus, like Henry V (F) and
Pericles, use <SCENE n="0"> to designate chorus passages that are not
prologues or epilogues. SCENEs may be used with or without enclosing
ACTs <TITLE> </TITLE>	Initial heading in Folio; the principal
title of the play on Quarto title pages. Note: for additional
large-type lines on title pages, use the <FONTGROUP> tag (see below)
<LD> </LD>	Literary Division (e.g. Act, Scene.). Note that this
tag encloses original literary divisions; modern divisions are
indicated by separate tags (see 1.4 below) <S> </S>	Speech.
Includes the speech prefix and any included stage directions (</S>
may appear at the end of a hung word). <SP> </SP>	Speaker Prefix.
norm="Name"	Normalized form of the name; must be included in every
instance of a speech prefix, but not if the name is used in the
course of a speech. Example: <SP norm="Hamlet">Ham.</SP>. Where there
are more than one speaker, separate the normalized names by commas;
if there is a speech without a speech prefix, put<SP norm="normalized
name"></SP> to indicateits omission. <SD> </SD>	Stage Direction.
Each line of a split direction in the right hand margin should be
tagged separately; directions different in kind should also be tagged
separately. t="[type]"	entrance | exit | setting | sound |
delivery | whoto | action | location | other | optional | uncertain
Example: <SD t="exit"> <I>Exeunt.</I></SD> <SD
t=sound><I>Alarum</I></SD>. Of course there will be single
instructions that include more than one kind of direction, in which
case you should separate the types with a comma: <SD t="entrance,
setting"><I>Enter Macbeths Wife alone with a Letter</I>.</SD>. <MODE>
</MODE>	Indicator of verse or prose. t="[mode]"	prose | verse |
uncertain Example: <MODE t="prose"> . . . </MODE>. Note that you may
choose to use a type of "uncertain" where it is not clear that the
section is either verse or prose. <QUOTE> </QUOTE>	Quotation. The
type of quotation (verse or prose) is selected according to the
current MODE. If a song, for example, is inserted into a prose
passage, you should first change the MODE then use QUOTE, changing
the MODE back after the QUOTE is closed. source=	When the verse is
a quotation from another source, the source should be recorded (as in
Pistol's quotations from earlier plays). For matters concerning
display, see the tags <SPACE> and <INDENT>. <FOREIGN>
</FOREIGN>	Language when not English. Used for the content of
speeches only, not Latin stage directions, literary divisions etc.
lang="language"	Example <FOREIGN lang="French">Diable!</FOREIGN>.
A 1.3. Printing elements

	a) Page

	<PAGE n="[number]"> </PAGE>	defines the extent of a printed
page. n gives the page number. <SIG> </SIG>	Page Signature
(encloses the printed signature, and appears at the end of the page,
where it will be displayed). Note that the signature itself may
include other tags where necessary (if, for example, an italic letter
is used). n="[signature]"	The signature in its normalized and
accurate form. This will include all signatures that are implied
rather than actually printed, and must include either "r" or "v" for
recto and verso. Examples: <SIG n="A2v"></SIG><BR> <SIG
n="aaa1r"><LS>aaa</LS></SIG> <CW> </CW>	Catchword.
<RULE/>	Rule. (Note that the final forward slash is required to
"close" the tag.) <RT> </RT>	Running title. <PN> </PN>	Page
number as printed. <COL n="0"></COL>	Defines pages with no columns
in a document that elsewhere has columns; where there are columns,
indicates a print element that spans both columns. <COL
n="1"></COL>	Column 1 (Folio). Placed at the beginning of the
column. <COL n="2"></COL>	Column 2 (Folio). <CL> </CL>	Closing
(e.g. Finis). b) Typesetting

	<I> </I>	Italic text. Italics may also be generated in the
normal word processor way to assist you in working with a readable
text; they will later be converted automatically. Note: intermediate
spaces should be italicized. <BLL> </BLL>	Black Letter. Note: for
texts basically in black letter, use the metadata tag <META
name="ISE.DefaultFont" content="BLL"/>. <R> </R>	Roman text. Note:
this tag will only be used in texts for which black letter is the
default. <LS> </LS>	Letter-Spaced (e.g., "G O D"). Note: do not
include actual spaces in the word to be letter-spaced: <LS>GOD</LS>
is correct. <FONTGROUP> </FONTGROUP>	Can be used to indicate
different sizes of type. n="1 . . . 6" 	where n="1" is the
smallest size, n="3" is normal type, and n="6" is the largest <SUP>
</SUP>	Superscript characters (this follows the HTML 3.2
convention). <SUB> </SUB>	Subscript characters. <J>
</J>	Justified line(s). Only fully justified lines are tagged.
Note that verse lines that reach to the end of the column should not
be tagged as justified (though many draft texts do), since these are
not justified in the way that prose lines are. <HW> </HW>	Hung
Word(s). Note that the hung word should be restored to the line it
continues; the "type" indicates whether it was originally displaced
to the previous or next line. t="prev | next"	The type of hung
word indicates whether it appears on the previous or next line from
the line it continues. <C> </C>	Centered text. As in HTML this tag
applies to a whole line. Each centered line should be tagged. <RA>
</RA>	Right Aligned text. This tag can be applied to a separate
part of a line, so is the equivalent of a tab rather than right
alignment for the whole line. <ORNAMENT/>	Ornament. <ORNAMENT>
</ORNAMENT>	Used for drop capitals only. drop="[number]"	The
number of lines the drop capital occupies. <L/>	Blank line.
(Previously tagged <BL> or <L></L>.) Line breaks	Line breaks will
be indicated in the normal way by a carriage return, so lines should
not be broken except where they are in the original. The one
exception is where a tag is the only item on the line (<COL n="1"> is
an example). In the final version of the texts the line breaks will
be replaced by appropriate tags automatically. c) Abbreviations

	Abbreviations in the old-spelling texts are tagged in a form that
indicates the full, or expanded, version of the word as part of the
tagging. The basic tag is this: <ABBR expan="[full
word]">[abbreviation]</ABBR> Example: where the original reads "My L.
Mayor" My <ABBR expan="Lord">L.</ABBR> Mayor There are two kinds of
abbreviations that involve early type forms. a) The instance where a
single character is involved. This is found in the instances where
the letter "y" with a small superscript above it represents either
"the" or "that." This single character should be tagged thus: <ABBR
expan="the">y<SUP>e</SUP></ABBR> <ABBR
expan="that">y<SUP>t</SUP></ABBR> A similar case is the abbreviation
for "which" with a small "c" over the "w": <ABBR
expan="which">w<SUP>c</SUP></ABBR> b) The instance where there is a
small superscript character as an additional type, as in <ABBR
expan="Master">M<SUP>r</SUP></ABBR>. d) Characters and ligatures

	{-}	Hyphen at end of line (soft hyphen). {s}	Long s.
{P}	Paragraphus (¶). {sm}	Section mark (§). {^o}	letter with
circumflex (ô). {"o}	letter with dieresis (ü). {'e}	letter with
acute accent (é). {`e}	letter with grave accent (è).
{_m}	letter with macron accent. {~n}	letter with tilde accent
(ñ). {ae}	digraph. {oe}	digraph. ligatures.	{oe} {ae} {as}
{ct} {ee} {ffi} {ffl} {ff} {fi} {fl} {fr} {ij} {is} {oe} {oo} {pp}
{us} {st} ligatures with long s.	{s} {{s}h} {{s}i} {{s}l} {{s}p}
{{s}t} {{s}{s}i} {{s}{s}l} {{s}{s}} vv used for w	{w} VV used for
W	{W} Note: where an accent is also an abbreviation, the
abbreviation should be indicated thus: |m{_a}| e) Word spacing

	Word spacing will be normalized throughout, with a single space
separating all words. Add a space when the original uses punctuation
as a word separator. In cases where there is doubt as to whether a
space is intended (a word that could be a compound, for example, or
where words are clearly run on without a space), indicate the
doubtful space by {#}. NOTE: editors may choose to indicate all added
spaces if they wish. The contrary case, where a space is added where
there should be none (as in "now th ou art") is indicated by { }
(brackets enclosing a single space). f) Indents and significant
spaces

	<SPACE n="[number]"/>	Indicates significant space to be left
in the text. The most common instance of this will be in formatting
the lines of verse in a song or sonnet, where some lines will be
indented further than others. The number of m-spaces should be
indicated. There is no </SPACE> tag (the forward slash at the end of
the tag is the equivalent of a closing tag). In the modern text,
prose and verse will automatically be indented when the <PROSEQUOTE>
or <VERSEQUOTE> tag is used <INDENT n="[number]"></INDENT>	In the
old-spelling transcription, indicates indentation for a whole block
of text (prose or verse) n=	The number of m spaces indented.
Further indentation in verse should be shown by the use of the <SPACE
n="[number]"> where again n is the number of m spaces. A 1.4.
References and modern act, scene divisions

	<TLN n="[number]"/>	Through Line Number. The basic method of
internal reference for the editions will be the TLN number. Where a
quarto or modern edition omits material the numbers will be omitted;
where they add material the numbers will be added decimally (<TLN
n="1033.1"> etc.); where the line division varies from the Folio the
TLN number will be that of the first word of the line. <ACT>
</ACT>	Act division as in the modern edition. n="[number]">	The
number of the act. If the original includes an act division which has
been retained, the notation would be thus: </ACT><ACT n="2">
<LD>Actus Secundus</LD>. <SCENE> </SCENE>	Scene division as in the
modern edition. n="[number]">	Example: </SCENE> </ACT><ACT n="2">
<LD>A{ct}us Secundus, Sc{oe}na Prima</LD> <SCENE n="1"> <SD><I>Enter
Hamlet</I>.</SD> . . . A 1.5. Multiple tags and hierarchical
structures

	The tags in the Renaissance texts of the Internet Shakespeare
Editions are on the whole not hierarchical, since they are
representational rather than logical. Thus one tag can cross the
boundary of another where necessary. Nonetheless, it is good manners
to keep the boundaries logical and consistent wherever possible. In
this example the overall <S> </S> tag encloses both the speech prefix
(which is logically necessary) and the tag that indicates a justified
line. In turn the <J> </J> tag encloses the speech prefix tag. <TLN
n="452"/><S><J><SP><I>Nurse</I>.</SP> Goe Gyrle, seeke happie nights
to happy daies.</J></S> In the next passage the hung word complicates
the process, since it also ends a speech. <TLN
n="19"/><S><J><SP><I>Samp</I>.</SP> True, and therefore women being
the weaker</J> <TLN n="20"/><J>Vessels, are euer thrust to the wall:
therefore I will push</J> <TLN n="21"/><J><I>Mountagues</I> men from
the wall, and thrust his Maides to</J> <TLN n="22"/>the wall</S> <TLN
n="23"/><S><J><SP><I>Greg</I>.</SP> The Quarrell is betweene our
Masters, and vs</J> <HW t="prev"><RA>(their men.</RA><HW></S> <TLN
n="24"/><S><J><SP><I>Samp</I>.</SP> 'Tis all one, I will shew my
selfe a tyrant: when</J> <TLN n="25"/><J>I haue fought with the men,
I will bee ciuill with the</J> <TLN n="26"/>Maids, and cut off their
heads.</S> This example includes a stage direction divided between
two lines, right aligned. <TLN n="721"/>And euery Greeke of mettell
let him know, <TLN n="722"/>What Troy meanes fairely, shall be spoke
alowd. <SD><RA><I>Sound</I> <HW
t="next"><I>trumpet</I>.</HW></RA></SD> <TLN n="724"/>We haue great
<I>Agamemnon</I> heere in Troy, <TLN n="725"/>A Prince calld
<I>Hector</I>, <I>Priam</I> is his father, Where there is a
combination of tags indicating logical structures (speech, stage
direction etc.) and physical characteristics (justification etc.),
the logical tags should wherever possible surround the physical tags,
as in the examples above. Previous | Table of Contents | Next

	A 2. The modern edition Last modified by Michael Best on
2015/03/06 15:20 Comments (0) · Annotations (0) · Attachments (0) ·
History · Information Edit Several tags will be the same as in the
early editions. For the modern edition, however, all tagging is
"logical" rather than "representational" -- in other words, you will
not indicate whether a word should be emphasized or italicized, but
will indicate the function of the word, allowing the software to do
the formatting. For this reason, you will not be using tags like
<I></I>, <C></C>, or <RA></RA>, even if you expect the final text to
be italic, centered or right aligned. A 2.1. Header

	Each document will have a "header" describing in detail the
provenance of the text, the names of those involved in developing it,
and a list of tags and abbreviations used. The header will be
compiled by the Coordinating Editor from information supplied by the
editor. A 2.2. Hierarchical tags

	<ACT n="[number]">  Act division. <SCENE n="[number]"> Scene
division. <S> Speech. <SP> </SP> Speech Prefix. <STANZA> </STANZA>
<DIV> </DIV> Defines patterns of rhyming verse. There are five
descriptions of rhyme scheme. form="couplet | coupletSequence |
sonnet | quatrain | rhymeSequence" for rhymeSequence you can add:
rhyme="[pattern]" (for example) Example: <DIV form="rhymeSequence"
rhyme="aabbcddc"> . . . </DIV> <QUOTE source="[source]"> </QUOTE>
Quotation (e.g. quoted letter, or a song). the MODE tag indicates
whether it is verse or prose. <FOREIGN lang="[language]"> </FOREIGN>
Surrounds a word or phrase in a language other than English. <TITLE>
</TITLE> Surrounds the title of a book or other work. <EM> </EM>
Surrounds words to be emphasized. </S> </SCENE> </ACT> A 2.3. Tags
which may be used within the boundaries of more than one level of the
hierarchical tags, but may not cross those boundaries

	<H2></H2> Surrounds the text of a heading (act, scene etc.). <L
n="n" part="i | m | f"/> See 4.4.8 above on division into lines. Part
may optionally be indicated by tabs: one tab = medial, two tabs =
final. <PROP item="item" desc="description"></PROP> (or when no word
is enclosed by the tags: <PROP item="item" desc="description"/>).
<SPACE n="[number]"/> Indicates significant space to be left in the
text. The most common instance of this will be in formatting the
lines of verse in a song or sonnet, where some lines will be indented
further than others. The number of m-spaces should be indicated.
There is no </SPACE> tag. Note that this is the only representational
tag in the modern text. <SD t="entrance | exit | setting | sound |
delivery | whoto | action | other | optional | uncertain"> </SD> <TLN
n="[number]"/> Through Line Number. A 2.4. Tags which have no
hierarchical structure, and may cross the boundaries of those listed
above

	One tag does not have to follow a hierarchical structure: that
which records the current mode of the work (verse or prose): <MODE
t="[mode]"> </MODE> Type: "verse | prose | uncertain". A 2.5. The
notes to the modern edition

	The notes to the modern edition will be in a separate file, keyed
by act, scene, and line number of the modern edition. Editors will be
provided with a template with basic tagging, and may add italics,
boldface type, and superscripts in their word processor. See 5.3.1
above, where there are a number of examples. A 2.6. The collation

	Like the Notes, the Collation will be in a separate file, keyed
by act, scene, and line number of the modern edition. The Collation
will also use the same method of indicating the passage to which it
refers. See 4.6.8-9 for the template and some examples of collations.
A 2.7. The annotated bibliography

	Bibliographies are formatted in HTML as ordered lists. <ol> </ol>
surrounds the whole bibliography. <li> </li> surrounds each entry.
For those editors with access to the bibliography program (IBM or
Mac) EndNote, the Coordinating Editor will provide a "style" that
will automatically tag the entries; the Annotated Bibliography may be
submitted as an Endnote file. A 2.8. The glossary

	The Glossary will use standard HTML tags for a "Definition List"
with one modification: the Definition Terms will be numbered in order
to provide an anchor for cross references. <DL> </DL> Surrounds the
whole glossary. <DT> </DT> Definition Term: surrounds the word to be
glossed. <DD> </DD> Definition Data: Surrounds the definition.
Previous | Table of Contents | Next

	Appendix Last modified by Michael Best on 2013/12/08 17:28
Comments (0) · Annotations (0) · Attachments (0) · History ·
Information Edit A 3. Supporting texts

	Edit Supporting texts will include the Textual Introduction,
Critical Introduction, sources, and any other supporting textual
materials. Where possible, passages in these texts will use the tags
outlined above, especially in quoting from the plays. Each document
within an edition is considered a separate entity; thus there is no
hierarchical relationship between separate documents. A 3.1. Header

	Each file should have a header of the same kind as is found with
the texts. A bare minimum will be an HTML comment with information
about the author, date of creation, and date of most recent revision.
Example: <!--Julius Caesar, Textual Introduction by John Cox. Created
2007-10-01; most recent revision 2007-06-12.-->. It is a good idea to
include the date of most recent revision in the file name so that you
can be sure not to work on an older file. Example: JC_textintro
2007-06-12.rtf A 3.2. Headings

	Remember that Internet users are used to having headings to
interrupt the flow of text on longer pages. The ISE site
automatically creates a table of contents for each page from its
headings. You are encouraged to use up to three levels of headings.
The first level is required; others are optional. A level one heading
is the title of the essay or page; thus there will be only one for
each. Level two headings break the page into its major sections.
Within a level two section you may wish to have sub-headings. If you
are familiar with the built-in "styles" of your word processor you
should use these. Otherwise make a clear distinction between levels
by using bold face or italic and varying font size. The key is to be
consistent. A 3.3. Quotations

	As well as setting off longer quotations in your essays, it will
be helpful if you use the standard HTML/ISE tags: <BLOCKQUOTE>
</BLOCKQUOTE> (for both prose and verse) <STANZA> </STANZA> Note that
these tags should only be used for longer quotations when a passage
is to be set off from the body of your paragraph. A 3.4. Italics and
other font faces

	In general, you should use your word processor to create italic
text. Your document will be converted to standard tagging when you
submit it in final form. In addition, it is helpful to add this tag:
<FOREIGN lang="[language]"> </FOREIGN> Surrounds a word or phrase in
a language other than English. A 3.5. Lists

	Although uncommon in scholarly discourse, you should consider
organizing your materials in bulleted or numbered lists, since these
are a common visual syntax on Web pages. A 3.6. Cross references and
links

	Cross-references in the electronic medium are a quick and
intuitive way for readers to branch to related topics or materials.
Use them freely, and often. Please indicate clearly where you wish
cross-references to be inserted. You can use the normal conventions
for indicating cross-references ("See xxx below" or "See the Textual
Introduction"), but it will be helpful if you put the reference in
angle brackets rather than normal brackets, since this will be
clearer to our assistants: "<See xxx below>." See 6.1.4 for further
examples. When your introductory essays are displayed on the Web,
they will have paragraph numbers; you can make a cross reference more
specific for a longer essay by indicating the paragraph number for
the content you are referring to. Previous | Table of Contents | Next

	Foyer_guidelines_appendixTagSummary Last modified by Maxwell
Terpstra on 2015/04/06 14:59 Comments (0) · Annotations (0) ·
Attachments (0) · History · Information Tagging Schema

	Edit This is the complete list of tags and attributes which are
understood by Michael Joyce's new java parser and validator, in the
text input files. The list is generated from the actual schema file
used to do the validations. The list is automatically generated from
the schema file. If you want changes, please let me know. Changes to
the wiki page can get blown away in future updates. Each tag is
listed in the following format: Sample Tag NAME

	A brief description, three properties for the tag, and then a
table of attributes. Most descriptions haven't been added yet. Empty
Yes, no, or optional. Tags like Ornament may be empty, or may contain
content and tags. Context One of the context descriptions below.
Depreciated A message suggesting other options
Name	Type	Optional	Empty	Renumberable	Depreciated	O
ptions name	One of the attribute types	yes or no	yes or
no	yes or no	A message suggesting other tags or attributes	a
comma separated list of options The description of name
attribute2	One of the attribute types	yes or no	yes or
no	yes or no	A message suggesting other tags or attributes	a
comma separated list of options The description of the attribute2
Context can be any one of these values:	Attribute type is one of
these values: apparatus collation or annotation files, excluding
level 3 footnotes anywhere any non-apparatus text primary any main
text of an edition (old spelling or modern), encoded using the SGML
syntax secondary introductory or supplementary materials, encoded in
XML old spelling non-modern, primary texts modern modern primary
texts annotations level 1 or 2 stand-off footnotes collations
stand-off collations string Anything that isn't an empty string.
number Anything that looks like a number. list A comma separated list
of values, chosen from the values in the options column. An empty
list is acceptable. select Exactly one of the values in the options
column. ABBR

	Edit Used to expand old-spelling contractions, e.g. <ABBR
expan="the">y<SUP>e</SUP></ABBR> Empty no Context primary Depreciated
no
Name	Type	Optional	Empty	Renumberable	Depreciated	O
ptions expan	STRING	false	false	false The expanded form
of the abbreviated word. This will eventually permit searches on the
word. ACT

	Edit Act division as in the modern edition. Empty no Context
primary Depreciated no
Name	Type	Optional	Empty	Renumberable	Depreciated	O
ptions n	NUMBER	false	false	true The number of the act.
If the original includes an act division which has been retained, the
notation would be thus: </ACT><ACT n="2"> <LD>Actus Secundus</LD>.
ADD

	Edit Indicates a passage in an "extended" text that has been
added from an alternative version. May contain LEM and RDG elements,
or directly contain added text for the extended version (as if RDG
were used around the entire contents). Empty no Context modern
Depreciated no
Name	Type	Optional	Empty	Renumberable	Depreciated	O
ptions wit	STRING	true	false	false An identifier for the
textual "witness" that the passage came from. Omit if using a child
RDG. AMBIG

	Edit Designates a word with alternative readings (marked up by
child RDG elements) where a word in the source material is
irreducibly ambiguous. Note: this is not a textual variant, but a
product of the process of modernization. Empty no Context modern
Depreciated no annotations

	Edit Root element of an annotation file. Empty no Context
annotations Depreciated no BACKMATTER

	Edit Surrounds all sections of an edition that follow the last
scene. The actual division(s) of BACKMATTER are designated by the
<DIV> tag, and include (and replace) such items as Epilogue, Colophon
and so on. Empty no Context primary Depreciated no BL

	Edit Formerly blank line. Depreciated in favour of L. Empty no
Context unknown Depreciated Use BLL for black letter or L for blank
line instead of BL. BLL

	Edit Black Letter (not to be confused with BL, previously the
indication of a blank line). Empty no Context oldspelling Depreciated
no BLOCKQUOTE

	Edit Previously used to denote a quoted piece of text (e.g.
letter). Empty no Context oldspelling Depreciated Use QUOTE instead
of BLOCKQUOTE BR

	Edit Break between lines of hung-words. Should NOT be used to
force line breaks in any other context. Empty yes Context primary
Depreciated no C

	Edit Centered text. This tag should be applied to a whole line,
except for portions marked up by RA. Empty no Context primary
Depreciated no CL

	Edit Closing statement (e.g. Finis). Empty no Context primary
Depreciated no COL

	Edit Defines columns in a page. Empty no Context oldspelling
Depreciated no
Name	Type	Optional	Empty	Renumberable	Depreciated	O
ptions n	SELECT	false	false	false		0, 1, 2 <COL
n="0">...</COL> Defines pages with no columns in a document that
elsewhere has columns. <COL n="1 | 2">...</COL> Column 1 or 2
(Folio). coll

	Edit Top level element for an collation. Contains information on
the lemma in the text (<lem>), alternate readings (<rdg>), and notes
about the variance (<general_note>). Empty no Context collations
Depreciated no collations

	Edit Root element of a collations file. Empty no Context
collations Depreciated no CW

	Edit Catchword Empty no Context oldspelling Depreciated no DIV

	Edit Named Division of the text that is not an ACT or SCENE.
Empty no Context primary Depreciated no
Name	Type	Optional	Empty	Renumberable	Depreciated	O
ptions link	STRING	true	false	false	Link attributes
should be dropped from the text. No description provided.
name	STRING	false	false	false Name of the section EM

	Edit Words to be emphasized. Empty no Context anywhere
Depreciated no EPILOGUE

	Edit No description provided. Empty no Context primary
Depreciated Use BACKMATTER with DIV instead of EPILOGUE FONTGROUP

	Edit This tag allows the editor to fine-tune font size where
necessary, as, for example, on a title page. Empty no Context
oldspelling Depreciated no
Name	Type	Optional	Empty	Renumberable	Depreciated	O
ptions n	SELECT	false	false	false		1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
The normal (default) size is "3", the smallest "1" and the largest
"6". FOREIGN

	Edit Surrounds a word or phrase in a language other than English.
Used for the content of speeches only, not Latin stage directions,
literary divisions etc. Example <FOREIGN
lang="French">Diable!</FOREIGN>. Empty no Context primary Depreciated
no
Name	Type	Optional	Empty	Renumberable	Depreciated	O
ptions lang	STRING	false	false	false The name of the
language used. FRONTMATTER

	Edit Surrounds all sections of an edition that precede the first
scene. The actual division(s) of FRONTMATTER are designated by the
<DIV> tag, and include (and replace) such items as Prologue, Epistle,
Dedication and so on. Empty no Context primary Depreciated no H1

	Edit Heading for scenes in the modern text. Empty no Context
modern Depreciated Use LD instead of H1. H2

	Edit Heading for scenes in the modern text. Empty no Context
modern Depreciated Use LD instead of H2. H3

	Edit Heading for scenes in the modern text. Empty no Context
modern Depreciated Use LD instead of H3. H4

	Edit Heading for scenes in the modern text. Empty no Context
modern Depreciated Use LD instead of H4. H5

	Edit Heading for scenes in the modern text. Empty no Context
modern Depreciated Use LD instead of H5. H6

	Edit Heading for scenes in the modern text. Empty no Context
modern Depreciated Use LD instead of H6. HW

	Edit Hung-Word(s). Note that the hung-word should be restored to
the line it continues; the "type" indicates whether it was originally
displaced to the previous or next line. Multiple lines of hung-word
content should be separated with BR. Empty no Context oldspelling
Depreciated no
Name	Type	Optional	Empty	Renumberable	Depreciated	O
ptions t	SELECT	false	false	false		next, prev The
type of hung-word indicates whether it appears on lines preceding or
following the line it continues. I

	Edit Italic text. Empty no Context anywhere Depreciated no iembed

	Edit Embedded content Empty no Context anywhere Depreciated no
Name	Type	Optional	Empty	Renumberable	Depreciated	O
ptions align	SELECT	true	false	false		auto, center,
left, lightbox, right how to align the embedded content within the
host document
component	SELECT	true	false	false		facsimile,
friends, imagedb, link, sip, slt, static, text The site component to
fetch content from. height	NUMBER	true	false	false height
(in pixels) of the embedded content
href	STRING	false	false	false identifier of the resource
to embed lightbox	STRING	true	false	false identifier of
the large resource to show in the lightbox
longCaption	STRING	true	false	false long-form caption to
show in the lightbox
showCaption	SELECT	true	false	false		false, true
whether or not to display a caption with the embedded content
site	SELECT	true	false	false		dre, ise, qme The ISE
sub-site to fetch content from.
width	NUMBER	true	false	false width (in pixels) of the
embedded content ilink

	Edit ISE link Empty no Context anywhere Depreciated no
Name	Type	Optional	Empty	Renumberable	Depreciated	O
ptions
component	SELECT	true	false	false		facsimile,
friends, imagedb, link, sip, slt, static, text The site component to
fetch content from. href	STRING	false	false	false the
resource to link to
site	SELECT	true	false	false		dre, ise, qme The ISE
sub-site to fetch content from. INDENT

	Edit Surrounds a passage indented in the original. Empty no
Context primary Depreciated no
Name	Type	Optional	Empty	Renumberable	Depreciated	O
ptions n	NUMBER	false	false	false Indicates the number of
em spaces a block of text (verse or prose) is to be indented.
iseHeader

	Edit metadata block Empty no Context primary Depreciated no J

	Edit Justified line. Only fully justified lines are tagged. Note
that verse lines that reach to the end of the column should not be
tagged as justified (though many draft texts do), since these are not
justified in the way that prose lines are. Empty no Context primary
Depreciated no L

	Edit Editor's line number. Mainly used in modern texts. Can also
be used to mark blank lines so they will not be collapsed. Empty yes
Context primary Depreciated no
Name	Type	Optional	Empty	Renumberable	Depreciated	O
ptions n	NUMBER	true	true	true Line number. Each scene is
renumbered from 1. part	SELECT	true	false	false		f,
i, m Used to create split-line groups, where each part is positioned
as if it were on the same line as the preceding part. The first part
in the group should be marked as part "i", intermediate parts as part
"m", and the final part as part "f". See Editor Guidelines 4.4.8 LB

	Edit Previously used for line break. <L/> is recommended. Empty
no Context anywhere Depreciated Use L on an empty line instead of LB
to preserve empty lines. LD

	Edit Header for a Literary Division (e.g. Act, Scene.). Empty no
Context primary Depreciated no LEM

	Edit Used inside of ADD to mark text that will appear only in the
non-extended version of the text. Empty no Context modern Depreciated
no level

	Edit Surrounds the annotation content. Empty no Context
annotations Depreciated no
Name	Type	Optional	Empty	Renumberable	Depreciated	O
ptions n	SELECT	false	false	false		1, 2 The "level"
of this annotation. Level 1 annotations are short, and tend to focus
on basic meaning without context. Level 2 annotations provide longer,
deeper explainations of meaning in context. LINEGROUP

	Edit Surrounds a pattern of rhyming verse. Empty no Context
primary Depreciated no
Name	Type	Optional	Empty	Renumberable	Depreciated	O
ptions form	SELECT	false	false	false		couplet,
coupletSequence, quatrain, rhymeSequence, sonnet The form of the
rhyme. rhyme	STRING	false	false	false The group's rhyming
pattern, for example aabbcddc LINK

	Edit describes a relationship to another document Empty yes
Context primary Depreciated no
Name	Type	Optional	Empty	Renumberable	Depreciated	O
ptions href	STRING	true	false	false identifier of the
related resource order	NUMBER	true	false	false order that
this item will appear on the edition title page
rel	STRING	true	false	false the kind of relationship,
describe in the forward direction (how the linked resource relates to
this one) rev	STRING	true	false	false the kind of
relationship, described in the reverse direction (how this resource
relates to the linked one) linklist

	Edit Provides a list of <linkText> describing witness names that
should be linked to ISE editions when displayed Empty no Context
collations Depreciated no linkText

	Edit A witness name that refers to an ISE edition. Empty no
Context collations Depreciated no ln

	Edit The line numbers from the modern edition to which a
collation or note is linked. The format of the content follows the
MLA style: 1.3.33, for example. Empty optional Context apparatus
Depreciated no
Name	Type	Optional	Empty	Renumberable	Depreciated	O
ptions l	NUMBER	true	false	false Editor's line number.
qln	NUMBER	true	false	false Quarto line number
tln	NUMBER	true	false	false Through-line number LS

	Edit Surrounds letter-spaced words (e.g., "G O D"). Empty no
Context oldspelling Depreciated no MARG

	Edit Marginalia Empty no Context primary Depreciated no
Name	Type	Optional	Empty	Renumberable	Depreciated	O
ptions loc	SELECT	false	false	false		left, right
Which page margin this text appears in META

	Edit A metadata item about the document. Empty yes Context
primary Depreciated no
Name	Type	Optional	Empty	Renumberable	Depreciated	O
ptions content	STRING	false	true	false the metadata
content name	STRING	false	false	false metadata key
scheme	STRING	true	false	false format of the metadata
content MODE

	Edit Indicator of verse or prose. Empty no Context primary
Depreciated no
Name	Type	Optional	Empty	Renumberable	Depreciated	O
ptions t	SELECT	false	false	false		prose,
uncertain, verse Note that you may choose to use a type of
"uncertain" where it is not clear that the section is either verse or
prose. note

	Edit Additional notes about the variant. Use as a child of <coll>
when the note applies to the collation as a whole, or as a child of
<rdg> when it applies to a specific reading. Empty no Context
collations Depreciated no ORNAMENT

	Edit Self-closing <ORNAMENT /> is a printer's ornament.
<ORNAMENT> </ORNAMENT> is used for decorative or large font letters
only. Empty optional Context oldspelling Depreciated no
Name	Type	Optional	Empty	Renumberable	Depreciated	O
ptions drop	NUMBER	true	false	false Marks this ornament
as a drop-capital, and specifies the number of lines to span.
letter	STRING	true	false	false	Give the letter in the
content of the ORNAMENT element instead. The ornamented letter. PAGE

	Edit Indicates page breaks in the old-spelling texts. Empty no
Context oldspelling Depreciated no
Name	Type	Optional	Empty	Renumberable	Depreciated	O
ptions compositor	STRING	true	false	false The
compositor(s) of this page. n	NUMBER	false	false	true The
"through page number" for the text.
sig	STRING	true	false	false The page signature in its
normalized and accurate form. This will include all signatures that
are implied rather than actually printed, and must include either "r"
or "v" for recto and verso. PN

	Edit Page number as printed. Empty no Context oldspelling
Depreciated no
Name	Type	Optional	Empty	Renumberable	Depreciated	O
ptions n	NUMBER	true	false	false	Use @n on the PAGE
element instead. Actual page number where it differs from the printed
number. POEM

	Edit a single poem in a collection of poems Empty no Context
primary Depreciated Use DIV instead of POEM PROLOGUE

	Edit No description provided. Empty no Context primary
Depreciated Use FRONTMATTER with DIV instead of PROLOGUE PROP

	Edit Identifies props to be used in the play when they are
mentioned in stage directions or speeches. Empty optional Context
primary Depreciated no
Name	Type	Optional	Empty	Renumberable	Depreciated	O
ptions desc	STRING	true	false	false A short description
of the prop, if needed. Do provide the description for more than one
instance of the same prop. item	STRING	true	false	false
An unique identifier for the item. Where there are more than one in
the play (in the case of multiple letters, for example) these should
be designated "letter1" "letter2" etc. PROSEQUOTE

	Edit Formerly a prose quotation (e.g. quoted letter). Empty no
Context primary Depreciated Use QUOTE instead of PROSEQUOTE.
Name	Type	Optional	Empty	Renumberable	Depreciated	O
ptions source	STRING	true	false	false When the passage is
a quotation from another source, the source should be recorded. q

	Edit container for a collation reading's text when the reading
also has an associated <note>. Empty no Context collations
Depreciated no QLN

	Edit Quarto Line Number Empty yes Context primary Depreciated no
Name	Type	Optional	Empty	Renumberable	Depreciated	O
ptions n	NUMBER	false	false	true The line number. QUOTE

	Edit A Quotation. Empty no Context primary Depreciated no
Name	Type	Optional	Empty	Renumberable	Depreciated	O
ptions source	STRING	true	false	false a short
desecription of the source of the quoted material R

	Edit Roman type. This tag is used only in texts where the default
font is black letter. Empty no Context primary Depreciated no RA

	Edit Right Aligned text. This tag may be applied to a portion of
a line that is otherwise left aligned (the default), centered (with
C), or justified (with J) so that only the indicated portion is
affected. Empty no Context primary Depreciated no RDG

	Edit A Reading within an AMBIG or ADD. Empty no Context modern
Depreciated no
Name	Type	Optional	Empty	Renumberable	Depreciated	O
ptions wit	STRING	true	false	false An identifier for the
textual "witness" that the passage came from. Omitted when used
within AMBIG. RT

	Edit Running title. Empty no Context oldspelling Depreciated no
RULE

	Edit A horizontal rule. The tag is self-closing. Empty yes
Context primary Depreciated no
Name	Type	Optional	Empty	Renumberable	Depreciated	O
ptions n	NUMBER	true	false	false Width of the rule in
m-spaces. The default is a full width rule. S

	Edit Speech. Should include a speech prefix (SP). Empty no
Context primary Depreciated no SC

	Edit Small caps. Empty no Context oldspelling Depreciated no
SCENE

	Edit Scene division as in the modern edition. Note: In plays with
a non-diegetic chorus, like Henry V (F) and Pericles, use <SCENE
n="0"> to designate chorus passages that are not prologues or
epilogues. SCENEs may be used with or without enclosing ACTs. Empty
no Context primary Depreciated no
Name	Type	Optional	Empty	Renumberable	Depreciated	O
ptions link	STRING	true	false	false	Link attributes
should be dropped from the text. No description provided.
n	NUMBER	false	false	true The number of the scene, not
including any Act numbering. SD

	Edit Stage Direction. Consecutive directions of different kinds
should be tagged separately. Empty no Context primary Depreciated no
Name	Type	Optional	Empty	Renumberable	Depreciated	O
ptions t	LIST	false	false	false		action, delivery,
entrance, exit, location, optional, other, setting, sound, uncertain,
whoto The type of the stage direction, a comma-separated list.
SECTION

	Edit Previously used as section divisions in essays and
supplementary works. Empty no Context modern Depreciated Use DIV with
a name attrbute instead of SECTION.
Name	Type	Optional	Empty	Renumberable	Depreciated	O
ptions n	STRING	true	false	false The section number or
name. SIG

	Edit Page Signature. Encloses the printed page signature. Empty
no Context oldspelling Depreciated no
Name	Type	Optional	Empty	Renumberable	Depreciated	O
ptions n	STRING	true	false	false	Use @sig on PAGE
instead The signature in its normalized and accurate form. This will
include all signatures that are implied rather than actually printed,
and must include either "r" or "v" for recto and verso. SP

	Edit Speaker(s) for the enclosing speech. Should appear before
any speech text. If a prefix is not given in the source material, use
an empty SP tag to indicate its omission. Empty no Context primary
Depreciated no
Name	Type	Optional	Empty	Renumberable	Depreciated	O
ptions norm	STRING	false	false	false Normalized form of
the name. If there is more than one speaker, separate the noramlized
names by commas. SPACE

	Edit Indicates significant space to be left in the text. The most
common instance of this will be in formatting the lines of verse in a
song or sonnet, where some lines will be indented further than
others. Empty yes Context primary Depreciated no
Name	Type	Optional	Empty	Renumberable	Depreciated	O
ptions n	NUMBER	true	false	false The number of m-spaces
should be indicated. STANZA

	Edit Stanza of a poem. Use instead of ACT/SCENE/DIV in long-form
poems. Empty no Context primary Depreciated no
Name	Type	Optional	Empty	Renumberable	Depreciated	O
ptions n	NUMBER	false	false	true The number of the
stanza. SUB

	Edit Subscript characters. Empty no Context anywhere Depreciated
no SUP

	Edit Superscript characters. Empty no Context anywhere
Depreciated no SWASH

	Edit Indicates an ornamental swash letter. DRE texts only. Empty
no Context primary Depreciated no
Name	Type	Optional	Empty	Renumberable	Depreciated	O
ptions where	SELECT	false	false	false		after,
before, both The direction of the swash ornament. TITLEHEAD

	Edit Title page material in quartos; initial heading in Folio.
Empty no Context primary Depreciated no TITLEPAGE

	Edit No description provided. Empty no Context primary
Depreciated Use DIV with a name attrbute instead of TITLEPAGE TLN

	Edit Through Line Number. The basic method of internal reference
for the editions will be the TLN number. Where a quarto or modern
edition omits material the numbers will be omitted; where they add
material the numbers will be added decimally (<TLN n="1033.1"> etc.);
where the line division varies from the Folio the TLN number will be
that of the first word of the line. Empty yes Context primary
Depreciated no
Name	Type	Optional	Empty	Renumberable	Depreciated	O
ptions n	NUMBER	false	false	true The TLN. var

	Edit "pop-up" variant to show on this lemma when it is hovered.
Empty no Context annotations Depreciated no
Name	Type	Optional	Empty	Renumberable	Depreciated	O
ptions wit	STRING	false	false	false Name of the witness
that the reading comes from. VERSEQUOTE

	Edit Previously used for a verse quotation (e.g. song). Empty no
Context primary Depreciated Use QUOTE instead of VERSEQUOTE.
Name	Type	Optional	Empty	Renumberable	Depreciated	O
ptions source	STRING	true	false	false When the verse is a
quotation from another source, the source should be recorded (as in
Pistol's quotations from earlier plays). WLN

	Edit Witness Line Number. Empty yes Context primary Depreciated
no
Name	Type	Optional	Empty	Renumberable	Depreciated	O
ptions n	NUMBER	false	false	true The WLN.
wit	STRING	true	false	false An identifier for the witness
that the passage came from. If omitted, the source witness referenced
in the metadata is assumed. WORK

	Edit The tag that surrounds the entire document. Empty no Context
primary Depreciated no
Name	Type	Optional	Empty	Renumberable	Depreciated	O
ptions genre	STRING	true	true	false	Use metadata
instead of the genre attribute. Previously used to decribe the work's
genre.

	ISE metadata Last modified by Janelle Jenstad on 2014/12/06 18:14
Comments (0) · Annotations (0) · Attachments (0) · History ·
Information Edit Each file in the area of the site that contains the
texts will have a header that includes metadata about the text. The
metadata include information that makes navigation possible within
each text, and record basic information about the date, provenance,
and creation of each file. The header is contained within the tags
<iseHeader> </iseHeader>. In the description that follows, examples
are provided in highlighted boxes. ISE-specific metadata

	Edit The first section records information specific to ISE files.
The metadata provide information necessary for navigation within and
between ISE texts. Each item consists of the name, and content of the
tag. Each is enclosed in double quotation marks; no angle brackets or
double quotation marks should appear inside the content section. A
general comment (optional) Though optional, the general comment
provides a convenient place for a summary of the history and editing
of the document. <META name="ISE.Comment" content="This text was
prepared for the Internet Shakespeare Editions in the Department of
English at the University of Victoria under the direction of Michael
Best; it has been checked electronically with the text from the
Oxford Text Archive, and has been proofread by Tanya Gough. Updated
with the addition of automatic ligatures, 2005-05-27. Edited by David
Bevington; last revision 2006-04-18." /> Collection (optional if an
ISE text; required if QME or DRE) This tag is used to place the play
on the appropriate site: ISE, QME, or DRE. [[JJ to MB: Do these
values need to be uppercase, lowercase, or either?]] <META
name="ISE.Collection" content="qme" /> Editorial status (required)
The editorial and peer-review status appear at the top of each page
of the document. options: "Not Edited" | "With Editor" | "Edited"
[[JJ to MB: I changed the third value from "Not Edited" to "Edited."
Can we clarify what "With Editor" means?]] <META
name="ISE.EditStatus" content="Edited" /> [[JJ to MB: Why are there
spaces before the slash in self-closing tags?]] Peer-review status
(required) options: "Yes" | "No" <META name="ISE.PeerReviewed"
content="Yes" /> Publishing history (optional) Though optional, this
item is valuable in establishing the background for a document. This
example is from the version of Plutarch prepared for Julius Caesar.
<meta name="ISE.Publishing History" content="Based on the editon of
Plutarch edited by Rev. Walter W. Skeat. _Shakespeare's Plutarch:
being a selection from the lives in North's Plutarch which illustrate
Shakespeare's plays_. Macmillan and Co. 1875. London. Originally
transcribed and published by the Perseus Project at Tufts University,
and made available under the Creative Commons licence." /> Editorial
principle (required) The editorial principle should be provided by
the editor. It is an important record of the general principles the
editor has followed in developing the edition. The version used for
old-spelling texts follows a standard format (thus far, since all
have been generated from print sources). <META
name="ISE.EditorialPrinciple" content="The transcripts presented here
follow the Quarto text as exactly as an Internet version permits;
word spacing is normalized, and modern forms are substituted for
letters and ligatures that have no modern equivalent in current
browsers (for example, the long 's'). This transcription retains the
old spelling of the original, and does not seek to correct errors of
the original text." /> The wording for a modern text is important
since it will indicate the copy text used, and the way the modern
text was generated from it. <META name="ISE.comment" content="This
text was prepared from the old-spelling transcription of Quarto 1,
edited by Rosemary Gaby for the ISE." /> Section division (required)
options: "scene" | "stanza" | "poem" | "section" | The section
division indicates how the document will be displayed in its default
view. Plays will be divided into scenes whether they contain acts or
not. Poems may be divided into stanzas, the Sonnets into poems. Any
document may be divided into sections. <META
name="ISE.SectionDivision" content="scene" /> Section display
(required) This item controls the display of the Section division. In
most cases (scenes, sections) it will be "1"; in the case of poems or
collections, it will be the number that makes for comfortable reading
on a screen -- "5" stanzas at at time, or "3" poems (sonnets), for
example. <META name="ISE.SectionDisplay" content="1" /> Line number
interval (required) The line number interval controls the display of
numbering in the left-hand column of the work. For plays and poems
the norm is "5", and for documents divided into numbered paragraphs
the norm is "1". <META name="ISE.LineNumberInterval" content="5" />
Default font (optional) This tag is used only in cases where a
complete work is published in black letter. Plays printed in black
letter may have both the <I> and <R> (Roman) tags included. <META
name="ISE.DefaultFont" content="BLL"/> Link to related works
(required for introductory and supplementary materials) This item
indicates which work(s) a document is connected to. Thus all
introductory essays and supplementary materials require at least one
link. format: there are three items to be recorded for each link rev
-- indicates where the work should be listed on the title page:
"introductory" | "supplementary" href -- indicates the work(s) from
which links will be made. The href is the MLA identifier. order --
the order the work will be listed on the title page of the play <link
rev="introductory" href="TN_M" order="1" /> Document Type (required)
This tag declares the type of document this is, so that it can be
styled correctly. Most texts should be labelled as "play". Other
types include "poem", "characters", "bibliography", "chronology",
"glossary", "essay", and "footnotes". If none of these types is
appropriate, use "document". <META name="ISE.DocumentType"
content="play"/> Dublin Core metadata

	Edit More general literary data are recorded following (and
modestly modifying) the Dublin Core protocols. Most examples here are
from King John. Main title (required) This will be the form by which
the work is generally known. <META name="DC.Title" content="King
John" /> Alternative title (required) The alternative title will
appear on a work's title page; it can be more descriptive where there
are multiple texts for a given work. <META
name="DC.Title.Alternative" content="King John (Modern)" /> Creator
(required) The name of the author. In the case of introductory
essays, this will be the name of the editor. format: surname, first
name <META name="DC.Creator" content="Shakespeare, William" />
Subject (required) The subject category is useful for search engines
and should be reasonably extensive. Enter subjects separated by
commas. <META name="DC.Subject" content="Lodge, Rosalind, Rosalynde
prose romance, Thomas Lodge, As You Like It, Shakespeare" /> [[JJ to
MB: Should we be using Library of Congress subject headings here?]]
Description (required) Again, used by many search engines, the
description provides a concise summary of the nature of the document.
<META name="DC.Description" content="A modern-spelling edition of
King John." /> Publisher (required) This will be the same for all
documents on the site. <META name="DC.Publisher" content="Internet
Shakespeare Editions, University of Victoria" /> Contributor
(required where appropriate) The contributor(s) will be a list of
those involved in the creation of the document other than the author
(Creator, above). This item is subdivided by category, and is the
place the editor's name will appear for display on all pages of an
edited work. In each case, multiple entries should be created where
there is collaboration. <META name="DC.Contributor.Editor"
content="Bevington, David" /> For all texts of plays, the Textual
Editor for the collection (ISE/QME/DRE) should be acknowledged. <META
name="DC.Contributor.Textual.Editor" content="Rasmussen, Eric" /> For
each collection the Coordinating Editor should be listed. <META
name="DC.Contributor.Coordinating.Editor" content="Best, Michael" />
Old-spelling texts for the ISE that have been vetted by the Associate
Textual Editor should be acknowledged. <META
name="DC.Contributor.Associate.Textual.Editor" content="Bailey, Don"
/> And there is an opportunity to record multiple research
assistants. <META name="DC.Contributor.Research.Assistant"
content="Galey, Alan" /> <META
name="DC.Contributor.Research.Assistant" content="Gagel, Lindsay" />
Date (required) For each document, the date of original creation
should be recorded. Note that this refers to the creation of the
document, not the date in which the work may have been written.
format: YYYY-MM-DD <META name="DC.Date" scheme="W3CDTF"
content="2008-12-19" /> ISBN (optional -- added when the work is
assigned an ISBN) <META name="DC.Identifier" scheme="ISBN"
content="978-1-55058-410-3" /> Identifier (required) This item is
used throughout to identify the work in all links. For Shakespeare's
works the identifier follows the MLA scheme of abbreviations for
Shakespeare's plays; elsewhere other formats are appropriate as
approved by the respective Coordinating Editor. The second part of
the identifier is available to indicate variants of a given work
(Quarto plus number, Folio, modern etc.) <META name="DC.Identifier"
scheme="MLA" content="Jn_M" /><META name="DC.Identifier" scheme="MLA"
content="H5_FM" /><META name="DC.Identifier" scheme="MLA"
content="Ham_Q2M" /> Source (required -- provided by the Coordinating
Editor) This item provides information for the display of texts of
which there are multiple versions. <META name="DC.Source"
content="Modern" /> [JJ to MB: What are the other values?] Language
(required -- provided by the Coordinating Editor) Thus far we are
publishing in English. <META name="DC.Language" scheme="RFC1766"
content="en" /> Relation (required) This item provides the base URL
to which all other links within the site are related. <META
name="DC.Relation" content="http://internetshakespeare.uvic.ca/" />
Rights (required) A statement of the intellectual property rights
(IP) for the document. Regardless of the ownership of the IP, all
materials on the ISE site must be available for educational,
non-profit purposes. <META name="DC.Rights" content="Copyright
Internet Shakespeare Editions. This text may be freely used for
educational, non-profit purposes; for all other uses contact the
Editor." />

	The Syntax for Creating Links Last modified by Michael Best on
2013/12/08 17:33 Comments (0) · Annotations (0) · Attachments (0) ·
History · Information Edit Editors can create links within their own
text and their introductory essays; the links can be to other
sections of their edition, to other sections of the ISE site, or to
external sites. They can also embed graphics, videos, and even texts
from other parts of the ISE website. Links can be created directly in
any document as well as in its annotations or collation notes.
External Links

	Edit NOTE: links external to the ISE site should be made only
when the editor is confident that the URL will not change in the
future. External links are made using the standard HTML <a> element.
This element requires a href attribute that specifies the page to
link to, and should contain text describing the end-point of the
link. For example, to link to a Google search page for Shakespeare,
you would write something like The <a
href="http://www.google.ca/search?q=Shakespeare">Google search for
"Shakespeare"</a> currently shows the ISE as the second-highest
authority on the internet! Resources external to the ISE website
should never be directly embedded into a document, with one
exception: links to London locations in ​The Map of Early Modern
London (MoEML) are treated in ISE, DRE, and QME texts as internal
links. See below Internal Links

	Edit Internal links are made using the <ilink> element. An
"ilink" consists of two parts: The component of the whole website
that contains the item to be linked. This may be the texts of the
plays, the library of facsimiles, the Life and Times section of the
site, or the database of Shakespeare in performance. The href, or
specific location within the module that is the target for the link.
In most cases, you will be linking to another section of the same
module -- from your introductory essays to a passage in the text, for
example. In this case you will need to include only the second part
of the ilink, the href. The href attribute is used to specify what to
link to, according to the rules described below. Some kinds of links
also require a component attribute to be appropriately set. The
element may contain text and markup describing the end-point of the
link; if it is empty, a default description will be supplied.
Creating links from the annotations or collations of a document
should look exactly the same as links from the document itself. TLNs
in the current document

	If your document uses TLNs, you can create a link to a specific
TLN like so: Please refer to <ilink href="#tln-36">the full
discussion</ilink> for details. If your document does not use TLNs,
you can link to a paragraph, since these will be numbered when your
document is converted to Web format. You should insert a generic
marker in the text (rather like "page 000" in a print MS). All
paragraphs behave like TLNs, so your marker would look something like
this: Please see <ilink href="#tln-000">the quotation at the
beginning of this essay</ilink>. Later, when you are asked to
proofread the document online, you can let the Coordinating Editor
know what the paragraph number (and hence the TLN) should be. Note
that there is no short-hand for linking to pages or ranges of
sections in the current document. For these kind of links to other
documents, see below Title Page of any text

	To link to the title page of a document group, you just need to
specify its code. The <ilink href="AYL">title page of As You Like
It</ilink> lists all introductory essays in this edition. A
Particular Document of any text group

	Most links of this kind will look like this: You may find that
the <ilink href="AYL/F1">folio spelling</a> is a little confusing for
high-school students. This links to the first page in the scene view,
since this is the default view. However, if you want to use something
other than the scene view, use this syntax: Pages of <ilink
href="AYL/F1/page">the Folio as originally typeset</ilink> are also
available. Links to introductory and supplementary materials are
handled in the same way. Each introductory essay will have a filename
that includes the MLA abbreviation for the play, the name of the
essay, and the extension ".xml". To link to one of these essays, use
the filename excluding the initial MLA abbreviation and the file
extension. Your General Introduction will have a filename like
"AYL_GenIntro.xml"; thus you would replace "F1" in the previous
example with "GenIntro". A cross reference from a level two note to
your introduction to a specific section (paragraph) might read thus:
Please see the <ilink href="AYL/GenIntro#tln-12"> full discussion in
the Introduction. This would link to your paragraph 12 in the General
Introduction. The same syntax links passages from one introductory
essay to another or from an essay to supplementary materials: This
question is <ilink href="AYL/TextIntro#tln-8">discussed
further</ilink> in my Textual Introduction.

	See <i>Galathea'</i> <ilink href="Gal/M#tln-19">TLN 19</ilink>.
In the second example above, the link is to the modern text ("M") of
Galathea, paragraph 8. Use the same syntax to link to a TLN in a
different play or its introductory essays: John Cox discusses the
process of printing in the First Folio in his <ilink
href="JC/TextIntro#tln-2">Textual Introduction to Julius
Caesar</ilink>. Sections or TLNs of any text

	To link to a particular section (or range of sections) or a text,
the href would look like this (note that this links to your
transcription, not the facsimiles): See <ilink
href="AYL/F1/page/2-4">pages 2 - 4</ilink> of the Folio text. In this
case you must specify the view type in the above format (although
"default" is allowed). You can also link to a particular TLN or any
spot given an id (as explained above) like this: Look <ilink
href="AYL/F1/page#tln-265">half-way down the page</ilink> for an
example. In this case, if you don't care what view is used, you can
leave it out, like so: See <ilink href="AYL/F1#tln-265">TLN
265</ilink> for an example. Annotations (aka Level 1 or 2 Footnotes)

	NOTE: these don't actually work yet, but should soon A link to an
annotation will go to the page that has that annotation, and
automatically open it. Links to annotations look similar to TLN
links. If you don't care about the view type the link will look like:
The <ilink href="AYL/M#ann-460">annotation at TLN 460</ilink> is
worth noting. As shown in the example, the annotation is specified by
the TLN where the relevant lemma is found. If more than one
annotation occurs at that TLN, all of them will be opened. If you
only want one, you can specify which you want like so: Only <ilink
href="AYL/M#ann-493-2">the second annotation</ilink> is relevant.
Level 3 Footnotes

	NOTE: these don't actually work yet, but should soon Level 3
footnotes are treated like section links with a view type of
"footnote" for the purposes of linking. For example, See the <ilink
href="AYL/M/footnote">footnotes</ilink> for more information. would
link to the full footnote document for AYL_M, and See a more <ilink
href="AYL/M/footnote/222">detailed discussion</ilink>. would show the
footnote for TLN 222 of AYL_M. Ranges of TLNs are also allowed. Since
level 3 footnotes are really documents in their own right (with their
own TLNs, section ids, and annotations), the "#tln-" and "#ann-"
syntax for TLN and annotation linking respectively can be appended to
any of the above. For example, The similarity to <ilink
href="AYL/M/footnote#tln-123">traditional approaches</ilink> is
clear. would link to line 123 of the footnote document for AYL_M.
Internal Links to MoEML's London Locations

	NOTE: this feature doesn't actually work yet, but should soon We
are moving towards interoperability with ​The Map of Early Modern
London (MoEML). If your play includes references to London locations,
you will, in the modern edition, identify each London location using
the ilink element and the unique MoEML identifier for the location.
The purpose of this tagging is two-fold: (1) it will allow us to
visualize the London locations in a play using a MoEML map in the
ISE/DRE/QME environment, and (2) it will allow MoEML to import London
references in ISE/DRE/QME plays into its database of literary
references (with a link back to the ISE). If the name of the place is
in the text of the play, you will wrap the name within the <ilink tag
as follows: <ilink component="geo" href="mol:CHEA2">Cheapside</ilink>
If you wish to identify a London location implied in the text, you
will use an empty <ilink> tag as follows: <ilink component="geo"
href="mol:CHEA2"/> The "href" consists of a prefix and the unique
MoEML identifier. The prefix "mol:" enables the ISE to identify MoEML
references and enables MoEML to harvest London references from the
ISE texts. The unique MoEML identifier for London locations is an
xml:id consisting of four letters and a number: CHEA2 for Cheapside
Street, ALDG1 for Aldgate, LOND5 for London generally, and so on. To
find the MoEML xml:id for the location you are tagging, you will need
to work with MoEML. There are two relatively easy ways to find the
MoEML xml:id. 1) Go to ​MoEML's Encyclopedia index page, where you'll
find London's locations listed alphabetically within the categories
​Streets, ​Sites, ​Churches, ​Wards, and ​Neighbourhoods. Once you
find the location, click on the name to go directly to the MoEML
encyclopedia entry describing the location. The xml:id is part of the
URL. For example, the URL of London Stone is
​http://mapoflondon.uvic.ca/LOND2.htm. LOND2 is the xml:id of London
Stone. (2) MoEML has a ​page listing all of the xml:ids used in the
site. Once you are on this page, use CTRL+F (Windows) or Command-F
(Mac) to find any location. Searching for "London Stone" in this list
will turn up bibliographic items, library texts, and at least two
locations. You will want to be sure that you have the right LOCATION.
A few pointers about identifying London locations: (1) There are
cases where a gate, a ward, and a street all had the same name (e.g.,
Aldgate). Be sure you have the right one. (2) Some church names
(e.g., St. Dunstan's, St. Michael's) were used by more than one
church. Be sure you have the right one. (3) Some locations (streets
in particular) were known by more than one name (e.g., Eleanor Cross
= Cheap Cross = Great Cross), or were spelled in various ways (e.g.,
Cornhill, Cornehill, Cornhulle, Corne-hill, etc). All name variants
have the same xml:id. E.g., Eleanor Cross and Great Cross share the
xml:id ELEA1. (4) MoEML includes some London locations that are
beyond the edges of the Agas map, such as Greenwich and Tyburn. (5)
MoEML will gladly add other locations at the request of ISE/DRE/QME
editors. Your expertise will benefit MoEML as well as the ISE. If you
have ANY questions or suggestions about this new feature, please
contact Janelle Jenstad (Director of MoEML as well as Assistant
Coordinating Editor of ISE) at ​jenstad@uvic.ca Linking to the Life
and Times

	The component name in links to the Life and Times is "slt" Life
and Times href values parallel the URLs used for a given page, with
the "Library/SLT" portion removed. For example, the page
/Library/SLT/ideas/religion/calvin.html can be reached using a href
value ofideas/religion/calvin.html: <ilink component="slt"
href="ideas/religion/calvin.html">[your text goes here]</ilink> The
Life and Times component does not contain its own media files. In
order to simplify embedding SLT media, the href attribute of SLT
iembed tags is resolved relative to
trunk/cocoon/static/content/Library/SLT/media/, where most of SLTs
media files are expected to be stored. For example, to embed
trunk/cocoon/static/content/Library/SLT/media/images/7thAge.GIF, a
href value of simply images/7thAge.GIF could be used. This will
display the actual image in your document, rather than linking to its
page. <iembed component="slt" href="images/7thAge.GIF">[your caption
goes here]</iembed> Only media files (non-HTML) may be embedded.
Note: to find the name of an image file, right-click (or, on an older
Mac, control-click) on the image, and select "Open in a new window."
you will then see the image filename as the last item in the URL of
the new page you have opened. Linking to texts from ISE to QME or DRE
(and vice versa)

	Edit All links between ISE, QME, and DRE plays are internal
links. The only difference is that if the text is on a different
site, you need to specify that in your link. Here's an example that
will link to the home page for Leir from an ISE document: <ilink
site="QME" component="text" href="Leir">[linking text]</ilink>
Embedding

	Edit Embedding is achieved using the <iembed> element. This
element has several attributes, some of which are optional: href:
what resource to embed, similar to the href attribute of the <ilink>
element. See below for examples. component: (optional) which part of
the ISE site the resource is coming from. If you're embedding another
text, leave this out or specify "text". If you're embedding something
from the performance database, this should be "sip". In most other
cases, this should be "static". showCaption : (optional) whether or
not to display a caption. Possible values are "true", "false", and
"auto". Defaults to "auto" which shows the caption if the iembed
element has content, and otherwise suprresses it. If the value of
this is "true", but the iembed element has no content, a default
caption will be provided. height: (optional) maximum height, in
pixels, of the embedded object. Defaults to the object's intrinsic
height. width: (optional) maximum width, in pixels, of the embedded
object. Defaults to the object's intrinsic width. align: (optional)
position of the embedded object within the document. Possible values
are "left", "center", "right", "lightbox", and "auto". "left" and
"right" cause the object to float to the left or right of the
document content respectively. "center" centers the object,
suppressing text flow to the left and right of it. "lightbox"
provides a link which will show the object in a popup when clicked.
If this attribute is omitted, it defaults to "auto", which will
attempt to keep the object inline with the text. Looks complicated
right? Well, it's not actually that bad once you see some examples…
Embedding Another Text

	<iembed href="AYL/F1/page/2" showCaption="true"/> The above would
embed page 2 of the Folio version of As You Like It into the your
document. Since the element is empty but showCaption is "true", a
default caption to the tune of "Page 2 of As You Like It (Folio)"
will be used. Note also that, since the element is empty, a "/"
appears before the ending ">", and no "</iembed>" is needed. You
could also do this: <iembed href="AYL/M#tln-472"
height="100"/>Rosalind explains</iembed> Which would embed Act 1,
Scene 3 in a box only 100 pixels high, scrolled to TLN 472. In this
case, the box would be captioned as "Rosalind explains". The values
of href for embedding texts are the same as for linking to them,
except that showing annotations is not supported. Texts MUST NOT
embed themselves! Embedding Artifacts from the Performance Database

	Embedding artifacts from the performance database will look like
this: <iembed component="sip" href="artifact:1234#standard">An
example of a prompt book</iembed> In the example above "1234" is the
ID of the artifact to embed. "#standard" specifies that you want the
standard size of the artifact. If you'd prefer the large, original,
or thumbnail versions, you can use "#large", "#original", or
"#thumbnail" respectively instead. When embedding images, you will
probably want to also specify the maximum height and width, to make
sure the image fits properly into your text. For example, <iembed
component="sip" href="artifact:1234" height="300" align="right"/>
would make the image float to the right of the paragraph where the
element appears, and would shrink it down until it's only 300 pixels
high. Since I didn't specify which version of the artifact to use
(with the "#standard" syntax as in the example above), the system
will pick the size that is closest to 300 pixels high. Note that
specifying both the height and width may distort the image if they
aren't in the correct proportions; specifying only one or the other
will ensure that the image keeps the proper aspect ratio. Embedding
Other Media

	Pretty much anything else you may want to embed will end up being
stored in the "static" area of the ISE site, so the embedding code
will look like this: <iembed component="static"
href="textimages/mypic.jpg">An example</iembed> where
"textimages/mypic.jpg" specifies that you want the file "mypic.jpg"
that's stored in the "textimages" directory. You will need to consult
with the ISE technical team to find out what to actually use.
Previous | Table of Contents | Next 